  COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE IN A CUBICAL
                 EXTENSION CALCULUS

                                              HALVOR LANDE

       e-mail address : hsl@awc.no


          Abstract. We study framework extension over a xed cubical object theory rather than
          over cubical type theory in the abstract. The theorem object is a cubical extension cal-
          culus built on a chosen CCHM-style cubical core with univalence and Kan composition,
          together with a discipline of globally acting opaque extensions whose public interfaces are
          counted only up to canonical telescope isomorphism.      We call the least historical depth
          at which the normalized obligation sets cease to change, up to canonical equivalence, the
          obligation depth dobl ; separately, the minimal-signature depth dµ records which primitive
          historical trace arities survive in canonical µ-minimal public form. Within this calculus
          we prove a payload-aware trace principle decomposing each sealed public interface into
          new core payload and resolved coherence trace, and we measure extension debt by the
          presentation-invariant minimal opaque cost µ. The cubical metatheory together with the
          bridge normalization results yields a depth-two theorem stack: exact stabilization of nor-
          malized obligation sets at depth 2; elimination of every primitive historical eld of arity
          at least 3 from µ-minimal public signatures; recent-history factorization of every surviving
          binary primitive clause through the previous two normalized signatures; and a genuine bi-
          nary obstruction showing that depth 1 does not suce. The paper also isolates an abstract
          horn-computational interface strong enough to imply that exact-stabilization-plus-bridge
          pattern, and veries that stronger package for the chosen CCHM-style cubical calculus. Ab-
          stracting that proof pattern yields a universal ane recurrence for minimal opaque cost. In
          extensional systems with UIP the obligation depth collapses to 1. In the xed fully coupled
          cubical extension calculus studied here the obligation depth is 2, while higher-coherence
          elimination shows dµ ≤ 2, so

                                           µn+1 = µn + µn−1 + 2c
          under constant payload size c; after the shift Un = µn + 2c, the sequence is Fibonacci. The
          accompanying Cubical Agda development formalizes the candidate-and-obligation calculus,
          the cubical exact upper- and lower-bound metatheory, the canonical-trace replacement step
          underlying µ-minimal elimination, and the abstract recurrence package; section 6 records
          the exact paper-to-Agda map and the remaining paper-level passage from raw surface
          declarations to the canonical normalized-signature interface on which µ is read.




                                            1. Introduction


1.1.   The metatheoretic question. This paper concerns a simple but surprisingly rigid
question.

  Key words and phrases: cubical type theory, extension calculus, coherence, univalence.
2                                             H. LANDE




          When a type-theoretic core calculus is extended by sealing a new structure
          against the existing interface, how does the cost of integration scale with the
          historical depth of the library?

       The question is not about transparent user developments inside a xed library.         It
is about    sealed extensions: new type formers, modalities, or promoted interface packages
whose public behavior becomes part of the global exported interface.           More specically,
the paper studies the worst-case regime of       foundational core extensions : globally acting
additions whose exported payload must be specied across the currently active interface.
Examples include extending a univalent universe hierarchy, where the decoding machinery
must be updated against the library's active codes; adding a global modality presented
by explicit modal dependent-type syntax, such as a Fitch-style dependent right adjoint
                                                 +
or its cubical multimodal renements [BCM 20, AKGB24], whose action must distribute
across the exported type formers and transports already present; and heavily promoted
generic interfaces whose action is intended to range over the whole library. In that setting,
extension is constrained not only by local typing rules, but also by the obligation to interact
coherently with the eliminators, transports, computation principles, and comparison data
already exported by the library.
       Orthogonal extensions are not the subject of this recurrence law.       Adjoining a new
datatype such as Tree to a library that already contains List and Socket need not intro-
duce primitive TreeSocket interaction data merely to preserve canonicity.          Such sparse
or local extensions are important in practice, but they do not exhibit the maximal cou-
pling pattern that this paper isolates.      Ordinary user-level library growth therefore forms
a sparse dependency DAG in general; the recurrence theorem studies only the asymptotic
foundational-core regime of monolithic, globally acting extensions.
       The central observation is that these obligations are stratied by historical depth. Some
are purely unary: the new layer must act on one previously exported generator. Others are
genuinely binary: the new layer must preserve a previously exported compatibility witness
between two generators. The paper therefore tracks two related depth notions: one for exact
stabilization of obligation sets and one for what survives in normalized public signatures.


1.2.   The xed theorem object. This paper xes one cubical object theory from the
start.    Let C be a CCHM-style cubical core calculus with univalence and Kan composi-
tion [CCHM18, CHM18]. Over C we study a language of globally acting extensions exported
through opaque public signatures. A sealing step exposes only the normalized payload and
trace elds of that public signature; the internal derivation that discharged the obligations
is hidden behind opacity. The recurrence law proved below is therefore a theorem about a
xed cubical extension calculus built over C , not a blanket claim about every system that
carries the label cubical.   Cubical Agda enters in two roles only: as a mechanization en-
vironment and as a source of native cubical constructions used to witness the lower-bound
phenomena.


1.3.   The core thesis. The exact metatheoretic invariant is the obligation depth dobl ; the
                                         minimal-signature depth dµ . The thesis of the
separate surface-syntactic invariant is the
paper is that, once obligation depth is isolated from minimal-signature elimination, the
asymptotic law of integration becomes forced.
                          COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                                      3




          In the xed fully coupled cubical extension calculus of this paper, minimal
          opaque extension debt obeys a depth-two ane recurrence; under uniform
          payload size, the shifted sequence is Fibonacci.

       Here fully coupled refers only to the foundational-core regime just described: admissi-
ble extensions are globally acting payloads whose semantics or promoted action is intended
to range over the whole active interface, not orthogonal additions that leave most earlier ex-
ports untouched. Within that regime, the operative assumption is the scope of the advertised
global action, not a prior density axiom.     2.22 identies the primitive active   basis interface of
this xed extension calculus: native core extensions are constrained by canonicity-preserving
totality of the operational semantics, while promoted interface packages are constrained by
operational exhaustiveness of the exported global interface.         The resulting recurrence is
stated over the presentation-invariant minimal opaque cost µ, not over a chosen surface pre-
sentation. In extensional systems with UIP, the obligation depth collapses to 1, and under
uniform payload size the recurrence is rst-order ane. In the xed cubical extension cal-
culus studied here, the obligation depth is 2, and      4.11 gives the separate surface-syntactic
bound dµ ≤ 2; after the constant-payload shift the ane law becomes Fibonacci.


1.4.   Summary of contributions. The paper develops one theorem package with three
main components.

(1) We x a cubical extension calculus over a chosen CCHM-style core, formalize its states,
       surface extensions, elaboration, sealed extensions, promoted interface packages, active
       interfaces, and integration latency, and distinguish orthogonal extensions from globally
       acting foundational core extensions.     The payload and latency counts are dened on
       attened telescope normal forms, so they are invariant under admissible interface refac-
       torings such as rebundling records or splitting one interface into several shells.        The
       bridge section then proves that elaboration, sealing, and counting normalization turn
       explicit surface declarations into canonical normalized public signatures, so the abstract
       counts are theorems about extension syntax over the xed cubical core.            Within this
       framework we prove a basis-family coverage/minimality theorem for the fully coupled
       foundational-core regime, show that basis cardinality is independent of the chosen mini-
       mal generating family, establish a payload-aware   Integration Trace Principle, and dene
       a presentation-invariant minimal opaque cost µ measuring the irreducible trace elds
       that survive in canonical public form.
(2) We dene obligation depth dobl for exact stabilization of normalized obligation sets and
       minimal-signature depth dµ for elimination in µ-minimal normalized public signatures,
       and we prove the sharp cubical/extensional dichotomy for the exact invariant. In exten-
       sional type theory with UIP, the obligation depth is 1. In the xed fully coupled cubical
       extension calculus, the obligation depth is 2, while 4.11 gives the separate bound dµ ≤ 2.
       The depth-two obligation statement is supported by four complementary ingredients: an
       exact stabilization theorem for normalized obligation sets showing O
                                                                                (k) (X) ≃ O (2) (X)

       for k ≥ 2; a separate surface-syntactic corollary, obtained by reading the cubical synthe-
       sis theorem through the bridge normalization results, showing that primitive historical
       elds of arity at least 3 are eliminated from µ-minimal public signatures; a recent-history
       factorization theorem showing that every surviving binary clause factors through the
       previous two normalized signatures; and lower bounds from an explicit swap-induced
       binary sealing obstruction, read categorically by adjunction coherence, together with a
4                                                    H. LANDE




       topological exact family supplied by clutching constructions for principal bundles over
       spheres. We also isolate the explicit horn-computational hypothesis package behind that
       exact-stabilization-plus-bridge argument; in this paper that stronger package is veried
       only for the chosen cubical calculus, while the weaker exact/window wrapper is what
       supports the separate strict/brant 2LTT-style example.
(3) We combine the trace principle with the obligation-depth theorem to obtain a universal
       ane recurrence for minimal opaque cost. Under constant payload size c, the depth-two
       cubical case specializes to

                                         µn+1 = µn + µn−1 + 2c,
       and the shifted sequence Un = µn + 2c is Fibonacci. The associated structural ination
       factor still converges to the Golden Ratio.

       The Cubical Agda development described in section 6 formalizes the abstract candidate-
and-obligation calculus, the cubical exact upper- and lower-bound metatheory, the contractible-
factor decomposition of higher exact bers, the recent-history factorization chain, the canonical-
trace replacement interface for µ-minimal elimination, and the abstract recurrence package
underlying     4.8,   4.9,   4.13,   4.14,   4.16,   5.6,   5.7,   4.17,   4.19,   4.20,   5.8,   5.1,   5.2,   5.3,
and 5.5. The remaining surface-syntactic readings of 2.22, 2.23, 3.9, 4.11, 4.15, and the
µ-based recurrence are then obtained in the paper by combining those formal metatheorems
with the bridge results of section 3. section 6 records the exact Agda theorem names and
the trusted boundary.
       Table 1 summarizes the dependency architecture that the rest of the paper keeps sep-
arate: exact stabilization of obligation sets, elimination from µ-minimal signatures, recent-
history factorization, lower-bound binary obstructions, the ane recurrence itself, and the
status of each layer in the mechanization.


1.5.   Related work. The higher-dimensional background comes from the interpretation of
intensional identity types as weak ω -groupoids, developed by Lumsdaine [Lum10] and van
den Berg and Garner [vdBG11]. Several cubical calculi and implementations appear in the
literature; the operational setting xed in this paper is the CCHM-style cubical core of
Cohen, Coquand, Huber, and Mörtberg [CCHM18], together with higher inductive types
and Kan composition [CHM18]. Cubical Agda [VMA19] provides the mechanization envi-
ronment and the native cubical programs used in the development, but the theorem target
of the paper is the extension calculus dened below, not the full Agda surface language.
For modal examples we use explicit modal type-theoretic syntax rather than informal end-
ofunctor language: dependent right adjoints give a canonical Fitch-style dependent presen-
                +
tation [BCM 20], and cubical multimodal type theory shows how such modalities interact
with cubical structure [AKGB24]. For comparison with mixed weak/strict equality founda-
tions, see the two-level presentations of Altenkirch, Capriotti, and Kraus and of Annenkov,
Capriotti, Kraus, and Sattler [ACK16, ACKS23].
       The coherence-theoretic side is informed by Mac Lane's coherence theorem [Lan63]. We
also use Stashe 's analysis of higher associativity [Sta63] and the well-foundedness approach
                       COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                                           5




                Table 1: Dependency map of the depth-two theorem stack.

 Claim               Logical role                   Main inputs                        Status
  4.13, 4.14         exact O-stabilization at       horn-reduction metatheory and      fully formal-
                     depth 2 and trivialization     contractibility of cubical horn-   ized
                     of higher exact bers          extension bers
  4.11               elimination     from     µ-                                   bridge
                                                     4.9, 3.5, and canonical presen-
                     minimal        normalized      tation                         corollary
                     public signatures                                             (replacement
                                                                                   step formal-
                                                                                   ized)
  4.15               recent-history factoriza- factorization-complete        trace bridge read-
                     tion of surviving binary export       and     the     formal ing of formal
                     primitive elds           chronological-window chain          trace chain
  4.17, 4.19         lower-bound binary ob- swap barrier, adjunction coher- fully formal-
                     struction                 ence, and clutching-family wit- ized
                                               ness
  5.1                ane recurrence for µ      2.23, 3.7, and the chronological- formalized
                                               window package                      abstractly,
                                                                                   read through
                                                                                   bridge
 section 6           trusted-boundary audit    theorem-to-Agda         correspon- mixed; see
                                               dence for all rows above            Table 3


to coherence of Kraus and von Raumer [KvR19]. Our contribution is to turn coherence from
a qualitative structural property into a quantitative invariant of extension debt.
    The topological family used for the lower bound is the classical clutching description
of principal bundles over spheres; for standard bundle-theoretic background we refer to
Husemoller [Hus94]. The univalent and cubical perspective sits in the general landscape of
homotopy type theory and univalent foundations [Uni13].


How to read this paper. The paper is organized in three layers that can be read at dif-
ferent speeds. Layer 1 (Sections 12) sets up the xed cubical extension calculus, its sealing
discipline, and the presentation-invariant counts µ and κ; readers familiar with CCHM-style
cubical type theory can skim the denitions and focus on the ve-way taxonomy of                 4.2,
which governs every later proof.    Layer 2 (Sections 45) contains the main theorems: the
depth dichotomy, the upper and lower bounds, the chronological window, and the ane
recurrence. The key logical dependency is short:       4.13 (exact stabilization) and 4.11 (elim-
ination from minimal signatures) feed into         4.16 (two-layer window), which together with
 2.23 drives the recurrence of   5.1; Table 1 summarizes the full dependency map.           Layer 3
(Sections 3 and 6) documents the bridge from surface syntax to canonical interface and the
paper-to-Agda correspondence; these sections are important for evaluating the mechaniza-
tion boundary but are not prerequisites for following the mathematical argument. Readers
coming from categorical homotopy theory may nd the lower-bound constructions ( 4.17,
4.19) the most natural entry point; readers coming from proof assistants may prefer to start
with section 6 and read backwards.
6                                           H. LANDE




                         2. A fixed cubical extension calculus

We x throughout a cubical extension calculus built over a chosen CCHM-style core C with
univalence and Kan composition.       Its admissible extensions are globally acting payloads
exported through opaque public signatures, and later layers may depend only on that public
interface. The library therefore grows as a sequence

                                     B0 ⇝ B1 ⇝ B2 ⇝ · · ·
of states, where each step adjoins one new sealed layer of the xed extension calculus.


   States, extensions, and promoted packages.
2.1.

Denition 2.1 (State). A state or library is a monotone context B closed under derivability.
An evolution step
                                          Bn ⇝ Bn+1
adjoins one sealed integration layer, denoted Ln+1 .

Denition 2.2 (Surface extensions). Over a state Bn , a surface extension declaration is a
nite quadruple
                                   e = (Γnew , Γact , Γcmp , σ),
where Γnew is a telescope of newly declared payload symbols, Γact is a nite family of unary
action clauses against the active interface, Γcmp is a nite family of comparison or transport
clauses, and σ species which elaborated elds are exported through the sealed public inter-
face. The admissible extensions studied in this paper are exactly those declarations whose
intended action is global on the designated active interface footprint.

Denition 2.3 (Elaboration, sealing, and normalized public signature). Each admissible
surface extension declaration e over Bn elaborates to a core object

                                             Elab(e)
of the xed cubical core C : the payload telescope elaborates to new core declarations, the
action and comparison clauses elaborate to elds witnessing interaction with the active
interface, and the opacity component σ selects the public telescope exported after sealing.
The    normalized public signature of e is the counting normal form
                                     N (e) := N (Elab(e)),
obtained by attening the public telescope and discarding elds uniformly synthesized by
denitional equality or the generic structural operations of the ambient cubical calculus.

Denition 2.4 (Presentation equivalence and minimal opaque cost). Two admissible surface
extensions e and e over the same state are presentation-equivalent, written
                  ′

                                             e ≈ e′ ,
when their elaborated sealed extensions determine the same public typing judgment up
to denitional equality, canonical telescope isomorphism, and transparent internal normal-
ization.   Write Ntr (e) ⊆ N (e) for the irreducible trace schemas in the normalized public
signature of e. The   minimal opaque cost of e is
                               µ(e) := min |Ntr (e′ )| e′ ≈ e .
                                          
                          COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                                7




Denition 2.5 (Candidate). A candidate over a library state B is a pair
                                        X = (Xcore , Gobl ),
where Xcore is the mathematical content proposed for addition and Gobl is the family of
normalized atomic coherence obligations induced when X is sealed against the active inter-
face of B . Every admissible surface extension declaration e determines such a candidate by
elaboration.

Denition 2.6 (Counting normal form and atomic schemas). Every public interface in this
paper is counted only up to canonical telescope isomorphism : reassociation and attening of
iterated dependent sums, splitting or rebundling one single-constructor record into several
nested records, and currying or uncurrying iterated function arguments when these preserve
the same sealed typing judgment. Concretely, an exported interface is read as a dependent
record, equivalently an iterated     Σ-type whose eld types may themselves begin with Π-
telescopes. Its   counting normal form is the fully attened telescope obtained by reassociating
the Σ-spine and expanding such record wrappers.
    An   atomic schema is one irreducible generating eld of this counting normal form. A
eld is irreducible when its inhabitant is not uniformly synthesized from earlier elds by
denitional equality, reexivity, or the generic structural operations of the ambient calculus.

Denition 2.7 (Core payload size). For a candidate X , let P (X) be the nite set of atomic
payload schemas appearing in the counting normal form of the public interface contributed
directly by Xcore before any coherence witnesses against earlier layers are added. Its cardi-
nality
                                         κ(X) := |P (X)|
    core payload size of X .
is the

Denition 2.8 (Sealed extension). A sealed extension is a candidate whose obligations have
been discharged and whose resolved data are exported only through an opaque public inter-
face. Future extensions may use those exports, but may not inspect the internal derivations
that produced them.

Denition 2.9 (Promoted interface package). A promoted interface package over B is a
nite package of constructively irreducible generators and interaction data that is exported
as one new sealed layer. Such a package need not modify the reduction rules of the kernel.
What matters is that its public generators become part of the active exported interface for
later sealing steps.

Denition 2.10 (Integration latency). The integration latency of a candidate X over B is
                                       ∆(X | B) := |Gobl |,
the number of irreducible atomic obligations that must be resolved before X can be exported
as a sealed layer.

Remark 2.11 (Refactoring invariance of the counting notions). Because κ, ∆, and later
historical support are computed on counting normal forms, admissible refactorings such as
bundling laws into one record, splitting one interface into several record shells, exporting cur-
ried rather than uncurried arguments, or pushing transparently derivable witnesses deeper
into an internal term do not change the counts. Only a change in the irreducible primitive
elds of the sealed typing judgment changes the metrics.
8                                            H. LANDE




       For a sealed layer Lk obtained from a candidate Xk , we write S(Lk ) for the set of atomic
exported schemas in the counting normal form of its public interface and

                                           κk := κ(Xk )
for its core payload size. The indexing is chosen so that ∆k denotes the sealing cost of Lk .

Proposition 2.12 (Transparent user-level code lies outside the recurrence). Let U be a
family of transparent denitions, lemmas, or record packages over B whose symbols are
denitionally reducible using the existing operational semantics and are not promoted to a
new opaque exported layer. Then U contributes zero integration latency and does not alter
the active interface seen by later sealing steps.
Proof. Such a development creates no new irreducible interaction site against the exported
interface. All reductions remain inherited from the pre-existing library, and no new opaque
generators are added to the global interface telescope. Hence U is ordinary growth inside
one state, not a state transition of the form Bn ⇝ Bn+1 .

Denition 2.13 (Foundational core extension). A candidate X over Bn is a foundational
core extension if its payload is intended to act globally on the currently active interface:
each atomic payload generator in P (X) is operationally or semantically incomplete until
its behavior has been specied against every generator in the designated coupling footprint
inside the active exported interface. Typical examples are extensions of a universe-decoding
apparatus, global modalities presented by explicit modal dependent-type syntax whose con-
                                                                                 +
text action must distribute across existing type formers and transports [BCM 20, AKGB24],
and heavily promoted generic interfaces whose exported action is library-wide.

Remark 2.14. Not every sealed extension is foundational in the sense of 2.13. A new
datatype or API layer may be orthogonal to much of the existing library and therefore require
only sparse interaction data.     Such extensions may preserve canonicity without becoming
globally coupled to earlier layers. The recurrence theorem of this paper is intentionally a
worst-case statement about foundational core extensions, not a universality claim about all
sealed library growth.

       This scope restriction is essential for the basis-coverage theorem below. Ordinary user-
level additions typically enlarge a sparse DAG of modules or datatypes and do not force
primitive interaction with unrelated earlier exports. The maximal-coupling statement proved
here isolates the special foundational-core regime in which the new sealed layer is advertised
as a   global operation on the active interface, so that canonicity and global closure become
exhaustiveness requirements rather than bookkeeping conventions.


2.2.   Global action, basis coverage, and canonical minimality. To speak about cou-
pling to historical layers, it is convenient to parameterize the visible interface by depth.

Denition 2.15 (Historical interface). For k ≥ 1, the historical interface of depth k at
stage n is
                                                  k−1
                                                  ]
                                       In(k) :=         S(Ln−j ),
                                                  j=0
the tagged coproduct of the atomic schemas exported by the most recent k sealed layers in
counting normal form.
                           COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                                  9




Denition 2.16 (Basis families of the historical interface). For each sealed layer L, a nite
family
                                          Sbas (L) ⊆ S(L)
is called a   basis family if it has the following properties:
(1) every eld of S(L) is uniformly generated from Sbas (L) by denitional equality, uniform
    polymorphic instantiation, transport along already exported equalities, or the generic
    structural operations already quotiented in           2.6;
(2) no proper subfamily of Sbas (L) still has property (1).

For k ≥ 1, once a basis family has been chosen for each of the layers Ln , . . . , Ln−k+1 , the
associated    historical basis of depth k at stage n is
                                                  k−1
                                       (k)
                                                  ]
                                      In,bas :=         Sbas (Ln−j ).
                                                  j=0
Its elements are the  basis sites on which a globally acting extension is primitively specied.
Theorem 2.17 (Basis existence and canonical bijection). For every sealed layer L in count-
ing normal form, basis families in the sense of 2.16 exist. If Sbas (L) and Sbas′ (L) are two

such basis families, then counting normalization identies a canonical bijection
                                         Sbas (L) ∼  ′
                                                  = Sbas (L).
Consequently the cardinality |Sbas (L)| depends only on the canonical normalized public sig-
nature of L, and for every depth k the historical basis cardinality |In,bas
                                                                      (k)
                                                                            | is independent of
the chosen basis families and stable under presentation-equivalent replacement of the partic-
ipating layers.
Proof. Existence is immediate because S(L) itself is nite and generates all of its elds.
Starting from that nite family and deleting any schema whose removal still leaves a gener-
ating family produces, after nitely many steps, a minimal generating family.
    For uniqueness up to canonical bijection, declare two schemas of S(L) to lie in the same
transparent-generation class when each is obtained from the other by the operations already
quotiented in 2.6: denitional equality, uniform polymorphic instantiation, transport along
already exported equalities, and generic structural reindexings.           Counting normalization
collapses exactly those operations, so every irreducible eld of the canonical normalized
signature determines one such class.       A basis family is minimal exactly when it contains
one representative of each irreducible class:           it must contain at least one representative
to generate that class at all, and it cannot contain two because then one representative
would be transparently generated from the other, contradicting minimality. Hence any two
basis families are canonically identied by matching the unique representatives of the same
normalized irreducible class, yielding the displayed bijection and the cardinality invariance.
Presentation-equivalent layers have canonically isomorphic normalized signatures by 3.4, so
the same class-by-class identication gives the historical invariance claim.

Denition 2.18 (Basis coverage and canonical basis minimality). An admissible founda-
                                          has basis coverage if, for any historical basis In,bas
                                      (k)                                                  (k)
tional core candidate sealed against In
supplied by 2.16, every basis site receives at least one primitive interaction datum from the
new extension. It is in    canonical basis-minimal form if, again for any such historical basis,
after elaboration and normalization each basis site contributes at most one irreducible public
trace schema. By 2.17, these properties do not depend on which basis family is chosen.
10                                            H. LANDE




Denition 2.19 (Fully coupled foundation). A foundation is fully coupled if the admissible
sealed extensions under study are foundational core extensions whose public signatures are
advertised as acting on the whole active historical interface. Equivalently, the paper's admis-
sible extensions in a fully coupled foundation are globally acting payloads whose intended
coupling footprint is the whole active interface, not orthogonal additions with sparse depen-
dency patterns. This denition xes only the scope of the action. The coverage/minimality
theorems below derive the exact irreducible primitive interaction data required to realize
that action.

     The next theorem turns basis coverage into a metatheoretic necessity for this globally
coupled regime rather than a stylistic choice.

Theorem 2.20 (Global admissibility forces basis coverage). Let Bn be a library state in a
fully coupled foundation, let X be an admissible foundational core extension sealed against
the historical interface In(k) , and let In,bas
                                          (k)
                                                be any historical basis for that interface. If the
extended theory is to pass the sealed library's global admissibility discipline, then every basis
site of In,bas
         (k)
               must receive at least one primitive interaction datum from X . For native
core extensions this is enforced by canonicity-preserving totality of the operational semantics,
while for promoted interface packages it is enforced by operational exhaustiveness of the
exported global interface.
Proof. By 2.19, the admissible candidates considered here are not arbitrary sealed additions
but foundational core extensions whose payload is intended to act on the whole active
interface. The theorem is therefore about that global regime only; orthogonal extensions of
the kind noted in 2.14 are outside its hypotheses.
     First consider a native global computational extension. In a Tarski-style universe pre-
sentation, suppose the active interface exports a code universe        U and a decoding map
El : U → Type.        If the new sealed layer extends the universe with a fresh code but the
extended decoding machinery omits one basis site of the active interface, then by denition
of   2.16 there remains a family of raw exported generators whose behavior is not recovered
from the remaining primitive clauses by denitional equality, polymorphic instantiation,
transport, or generic structural operations. Closed terms mentioning that uncovered family
no longer reduce through El, so canonicity fails on the extended language. The same phenom-
enon occurs for any native global operator advertised as acting across the active interface:
omitting one irreducible basis site leaves a well-typed class of terms at a stuck neutral or
partially dened reduction site. Thus native admissibility forces at least one clause for every
                (k)
basis site of In,bas .
     Next consider a promoted interface package. Such a package need not alter kernel re-
duction, so standard canonicity is not the right notion. What matters instead is operational
exhaustiveness of the exported global interface. If the package is advertised as a library-wide
action, its public typing judgment is a total dependent map out of the record enumerating
the active interface. Omitting one basis site again leaves an irreducible family of cases un-
covered, because that site's action is not derivable from the other clauses by the transparent
operations built into 2.16. Later sealing steps cannot therefore treat the package as a closed
global operation.        Thus promoted packages also require at least one primitive witness for
                          (k)
every basis site of In,bas .

Proposition 2.21 (Canonical normalized presentations are basis-minimal). Let e be an
admissible surface extension declaration over Bn whose candidate X(e) is sealed against
                         COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                                11




the historical interface In(k) , and let In,bas
                                          (k)
                                                be any historical basis for that interface. Then
the normalized public signature N (e) contains at most one irreducible public trace schema
for each basis site of In,bas
                         (k)
                                . Equivalently, redundant primitive clauses that dier only by
transparent polymorphic compression, denitional equality, transport, or generic structural
operations do not survive in the canonical normalized presentation.
Proof. Suppose two primitive clauses of e correspond to the same basis site. By construction
of     2.16, they induce the same public trace eld up to denitional equality, transparent
transport, uniform polymorphic instantiation, or the generic structural operations already
quotiented by counting normalization. If both survived as distinct irreducible elds in N (e),
then the sealed public signature would contain presentation-equivalent duplicate trace data.
But 3.2 says that N (e) retains exactly the irreducible visible public elds after normalization,
and      3.4 identies a canonical normalized presentation for each presentation-equivalence
class.   Hence one of the two clauses is redundant and disappears in canonical normalized
form. Therefore at most one irreducible trace schema survives per basis site.

Theorem 2.22 (Basis-cardinality density law). Let Bn be a library state in a fully coupled
foundation, let X be an admissible foundational core extension sealed against the historical
interface In(k) , and let In,bas
                           (k)
                                 be any historical basis for that interface. Then
                                                       (k)
                                      ∆(X | Bn ) = |In,bas |.
In particular, sealing cost counts irreducible basis clauses rather than the raw number of
exported generators, and the right-hand side is independent of the chosen basis family by
 2.17.
Proof. Coverage is exactly 2.20. Minimality is exactly 2.21 after passing from surface decla-
rations to their canonical normalized public signatures. Since ∆(X | Bn ) counts irreducible
primitive obligations in that normalized presentation, every basis site contributes one and
only one irreducible primitive trace eld. Therefore
                                                       (k)
                                      ∆(X | Bn ) = |In,bas |.



2.3.   The integration trace principle. In the fully coupled foundational-core regime, the
preceding theorem identies sealing cost with the size of the active basis interface. The next
theorem explains how those resolved obligations reappear in the next layer's public export
alongside the layer's own new mathematical payload.

Theorem 2.23 (Integration Trace Principle). Each sealed integration layer exports, in
canonical basis form, a disjoint union of two kinds of public schema: the new payload con-
tributed by its core content and the trace schemas corresponding to its resolved basis obliga-
tions. Equivalently, if Lk is the layer obtained by sealing a candidate of core payload size κk
and coherence cost ∆k , then there is a canonical decomposition
                                Sbas (Lk ) ∼
                                           = Score (Lk ) ⊎ Str (Lk )
with
                             |Score (Lk )| = κk ,    |Str (Lk )| = ∆k .
12                                            H. LANDE




Hence
                                      |Sbas (Lk )| = κk + ∆k .
Proof. There are two logically distinct sources of basis schemas in the canonical normalized
presentation.
     First, the candidate's core content Xk,core contributes genuinely new public generators:
a new type former, modality, promoted interface operator, or other primitive schema that
did not previously exist in the library.     By denition of core payload size, the number of
these newly exported payload schemas is κk . These form Score (Lk ).
     Second, by      2.22, sealing against the active interface requires exactly one irreducible
primitive interaction datum for each basis site of the active interface.      Formally, a sealed
layer is exported as a dependent record, equivalently an iterated Σ-type, whose elds consist
of the new payload together with the coherence cells needed to type that payload against
earlier exports. Opacity hides the inhabitants of those elds, but not the eld-types occurring
in the exported signature. Thus once such a datum is supplied and the layer is sealed, it
no longer survives as an inspectable derivation visible to future extensions; it survives as
a public trace eld recording how the new payload acts on that older basis site.          These
schemas form Str (Lk ), and there is one of them for each resolved basis obligation. Hence
|Str (Lk )| = ∆k .
     Crucially, this decomposition is exact at the level of the sealed typing judgment. Replac-
ing a primitive witness by a deeper internal derivation can change the hidden inhabitant of
a trace eld, but it cannot remove the corresponding eld-type from the exported telescope
without changing the public interface against which later layers are checked.
     Because the layer is sealed, every basis schema of Lk is of one of these two kinds: either
it is a newly introduced payload symbol, or it is the exported trace of a resolved obligation
attaching that payload to prior interface data.        The two kinds are disjoint, since payload
symbols are primitive generators introduced by the new layer itself, whereas trace schemas
are indexed by the prior basis interface against which the new layer was sealed. Therefore
the canonical basis export decomposes as

                                 Sbas (Lk ) ∼
                                            = Score (Lk ) ⊎ Str (Lk ),
and the cardinality formula follows immediately.

Remark 2.24. The trace principle counts kernel-level extensions and promoted interface
packages uniformly. In both cases the public export has a payload part and a trace part. The
only dierence is the kind of primitive datum involved: for native extensions the payload
contributes new reduction heads and the trace contributes dening clauses, whereas for
promoted packages the payload contributes new exported operators and the trace contributes
comparison or transport witnesses.




           3. From cubical syntax to normalized extension signatures

The counting calculus of section 2 is intended to measure explicit extension declarations over
the xed cubical core C , not a freestanding payload calculus detached from syntax. This
section spells out that bridge. Surface extensions elaborate to sealed core objects, sealing
exports only their opaque public interfaces, and counting is performed on the normalized
public signature of that export.
                          COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                               13




3.1. Elaboration and public signatures.
Theorem 3.1 (Elaboration soundness for sealed exports). Every admissible surface exten-
sion declaration e over a state Bn determines:
(1) an elaborated candidate
                                   X(e) := (Xcore (e), Gobl (e)),
(2)    a sealed layer L(e) exported through the opaque public interface selected by σ,
(3)    and a normalized public signature
                                       N (e) = N (Elab(e))
    obtained from that exported interface by counting normalization.
In particular, the candidate calculus of section 2 is the image of admissible surface extensions
under elaboration and sealing.
Proof. By 2.2 and 2.3, the payload telescope Γnew elaborates to new core declarations, while
Γact and Γcmp elaborate to the clauses witnessing the required interaction with the active
interface of Bn . Admissibility means precisely that these clauses type-check and discharge
the induced coherence obligations, so the result packages into a candidate X(e) together
with an opaque exported layer L(e). Applying the counting normal form of 2.6 to the
resulting public telescope yields N (e). Thus every admissible surface extension gives rise
canonically to the candidate-and-sealed-layer data used in section 2.

Theorem 3.2 (Adequacy of normalized public signatures). Let e be an admissible surface
extension over Bn and let L(e) be its sealed export. Then:
(1) every eld of N (e) comes from a eld of the sealed public interface of L(e); counting
    normalization introduces no new primitive public datum;
(2) every eld of N (e) is either a payload schema contributed by Γnew or a trace schema
    arising from a resolved obligation of X(e);
(3) every irreducible payload or trace schema visible after sealing occurs as a eld of N (e);
(4) the synthetic quantities P (X(e)), S(L(e)), ∆(X(e) | Bn ), µ(e), and O
                                                                                (k) (X(e)) are

    exactly the corresponding payload, public-signature, abstract latency, minimal opaque
    cost, and obligation sets computed from N (e) and its trace part.
Proof. Point (1) is immediate from 2.3 and 2.6: the normalization procedure only at-
tens the exported telescope and discards uniformly synthesized elds, so it cannot create
a new primitive eld not already present in the sealed typing judgment. Point (2) is the
surface-language form of the decomposition proved abstractly in 2.23: after elaboration and
sealing, every visible eld is either newly introduced payload or the public trace of a resolved
interaction with prior interface data. Point (3) follows because counting normalization re-
moves only presentation artifacts: reassociation of telescopes, transparently derivable elds,
and other data uniformly synthesized by denitional equality or the generic structure of
the ambient cubical calculus. Thus every irreducible eld that remains visible after sealing
survives into N (e), and no extra irreducible eld is created by normalization. Point (4) is
then immediate from the denitions of payload size, public schema set, minimal opaque cost,
integration latency, and induced obligation sets in section 2 and section 4: those quantities
are computed exactly from the normalized public signature and its induced obligations.

Proposition 3.3 (Necessity of irreducible public elds). Let e be an admissible surface ex-
tension over Bn , and let ϕ be an irreducible eld of N (e). If e′ ≈ e, then N (e′ ) contains a
14                                        H. LANDE




canonically corresponding irreducible eld ϕ′ . Equivalently, no presentation-equivalent dec-
laration can delete an irreducible payload or trace schema from the sealed public signature.
Proof. By presentation equivalence, e and e′ determine the same sealed public typing judg-
ment up to denitional equality, canonical telescope isomorphism, and transparent internal
                                                              ′
normalization. If the irreducible eld ϕ were absent from N (e ), then one of two things would
                                                         ′
have to happen: either the public typing judgment of e would genuinely omit that eld,
               ′
contradicting e ≈ e, or the eld would have to be uniformly reconstructible from the remain-
ing exported data by those transparent operations. But 2.6 declares ϕ irreducible precisely
by excluding that second possibility. Hence ϕ must survive in every presentation-equivalent
normalized public signature.

Proposition 3.4 (Canonical normalized presentations). If e ≈ e′ , then N (e) and N (e′ ) are
canonically isomorphic, and their trace parts Ntr (e) and Ntr (e′ ) are canonically isomorphic
as well. Consequently every presentation-equivalence class admits a canonical normalized
public signature up to isomorphism, and
                                       µ(e) = |Ntr (e)|.
Proof. Presentation equivalence identies elaborated sealed extensions whenever they induce
the same public typing judgment up to denitional equality, canonical telescope isomorphism,
and transparent internal normalization.    The counting normal form forgets exactly those
                                                                  ′
presentation dierences and nothing more, so N (e) and N (e ) are canonically isomorphic.
By 3.2, the payload/trace decomposition is part of the sealed typing judgment itself, so the
trace subfamilies correspond under that isomorphism. By       3.3, no presentation-equivalent
declaration can remove an irreducible trace eld from the normalized public signature unless
that eld was already transparently reconstructible. Hence every representative of the class
has the same canonical irreducible trace cardinality, so the minimum in     2.4 is attained by
Ntr (e) itself and equals |Ntr (e)|.
Theorem 3.5 (Computational replacement on canonical trace presentations). Let X be a
candidate over Bn , let k be a history depth, and let S be the canonical normalized trace
signature attached to the depth-k trace family of X . Let P and Q be two presented trace
telescopes whose counting normal forms are S , and let ϕ be a presented trace eld of P .
Suppose there is a lower-arity boundary subfamily ∂ϕ and a cubically synthesized term
                                           tϕ (∂ϕ ),
built only from hcomp, transp, hfill, denitional equality, and the transparent structural
operations already quotiented by counting normalization, such that after passage to S the
eld corresponding to ϕ is judgmentally reconstructed from lower-arity boundary data and is
therefore tagged as transparently derived rather than primitive. Then:
(1) P and Q are presentation-equivalent representations of the same canonical trace signa-
     ture;
(2) in the µ-minimal part of the canonical normalized trace signature represented by S , the
     eld corresponding to ϕ is absent as an irreducible primitive trace eld;
(3) every other irreducible primitive trace eld of P corresponds canonically to one of Q.

Proof. Because both P and Q normalize to the same canonical trace signature S , they are
presentation-equivalent representations of one canonical public trace interface. By hypoth-
esis, the normalized image of ϕ is reconstructed from lower-arity boundary data by the
                         COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                                   15




transparent cubical operations already quotiented by counting normalization, so its canoni-
cal primitive-cost tag is   transparently derived rather than requires primitive. Therefore ϕ is
excluded from the µ-minimal part of S , which retains only irreducible primitive trace elds.
Since primitive-cost tags are preserved under passage between presentations of the same
canonical signature, every other irreducible primitive eld of P corresponds canonically to
one of Q. Thus the replacement step changes only the presentation of the trace telescope,
not the canonical primitive content measured by µ.

Remark 3.6 (Status of the replacement bridge). 3.5 is formalized on the explicit canonical-
trace-presentation interface:Metatheory/ComputationalReplacement.agda makes presen-
tation equivalence, primitive-versus-derived tagging, and elimination from the µ-minimal
part of a canonical trace signature explicit. The paper-level part of section 3 is the surface-to-
interface normalization passage from raw surface declarations to that canonical presentation
interface via elaboration soundness, adequacy, and canonical normalized presentation.

Corollary 3.7 (Minimal opaque cost agrees with abstract coherence cost). For every ad-
missible surface extension declaration e over Bn ,
                                      µ(e) = ∆(X(e) | Bn ).
If ek is the declaration whose sealing exports Lk , if µk := µ(ek ), and if Sbas (Lk ) is any basis
family of Lk , then
                                      |Sbas (Lk )| = κk + µk .
Proof. By 3.2, the trace part of N (e) records exactly the irreducible public trace schemas
arising from resolved obligations of X(e). By        3.4, µ(e) is exactly the cardinality of that
canonical trace part. By 2.22, there is one and only one irreducible primitive trace schema
for each basis site of the active interface, so that cardinality is precisely     ∆(X(e) | Bn ).
The nal formula is then the trace-principle decomposition of        2.23, rewritten using µk =
∆(X(ek ) | Bk−1 ); its right-hand side is well dened for any basis family by 2.17.
Denition 3.8 (Factorization-complete public trace export). Let Lk be a sealed layer with
k ≥ 2. We say that its public trace export is factorization-complete if, after choosing any
admissible surface declaration whose sealing exports Lk and reading its canonical normalized
trace signature, the following data are available for the next remote-comparison step:

(1) the adjacent unary bridge from Lk to Lk−1 ;
(2) the binary comparison trace witnessing the composite comparison from              Lk to Lk−2
    through Lk−1 ;
(3) the degenerate or structural faces needed to assemble the corresponding open 3-box, gen-
    erated transparently by denitional equality, transport along already exported equalities,
    and the generic structural operations already quotiented by counting normalization.

Equivalently, the next horn-extension problem involving Lk can be posed using only ex-
ported public trace elds and transparent structural operations, without reopening the hid-
den derivation that discharged the original sealing obligations.

Theorem 3.9 (Sealed layers export factorization-complete trace data). Every sealed layer
Lk with k ≥ 2 in the xed fully coupled cubical extension calculus has factorization-complete
public trace export.
Proof. Choose an admissible surface declaration ek whose sealing exports Lk . By 2.23, the
public export of Lk decomposes into new payload and trace, and by           3.2 every irreducible
16                                          H. LANDE




trace schema visible after sealing appears in the canonical normalized trace signature Ntr (ek ).
Because Lk was sealed as a globally acting layer against the active interface, its resolved
trace obligations include the adjacent action on Lk−1 and the binary comparison against
the already exported comparison between Lk−1 and Lk−2 . Hence the corresponding unary
bridge and binary comparison trace occur as public elds of Ntr (ek ).
       The remaining faces needed for the next open 3-box are not extra primitive obligations.
They are degenerate composites, reindexings, and transports along already exported equali-
ties, so they are generated transparently by the structural operations already quotiented in
counting normalization. By      3.3 and   3.4, passing to a presentation-equivalent declaration
cannot delete the irreducible unary or binary trace elds just identied; it can only rewrite
them into canonically isomorphic normalized form.         Therefore the factorization data are
exported stably at the level of canonical normalized public signatures and can be reused
without reopening the hidden sealing derivation.       This is exactly factorization complete-
ness.

Remark 3.10 (Syntactic scope of the bridge). The results of 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4, and 3.5
are syntactic bridge theorems: they speak only about elaboration, sealing, opacity, counting
normalization, and the presentation-equivalence relation of 2.4. They justify that N (e) and
µ(e) are invariants of explicit extension declarations over the xed cubical core C .
       By contrast, 2.22, 2.23, and the later depth and recurrence theorems are metatheorems
of the abstract candidate-and-obligation calculus. Their application to surface syntax passes
through the adequacy theorem above: once an admissible declaration has been elaborated
and normalized, those later counts are read o from the resulting normalized public signature.
Throughout the rest of the paper we keep the denitions of N (e) and µ(e) from 2.3 and 2.4
unchanged; all later minimality statements are therefore relative to this xed presentation-
equivalence relation.




        4. Obligation Depth, Minimal-Signature Depth, and the Dichotomy


   Induced obligations and historical arity.
4.1.

Denition 4.1 (Induced obligations). Let O(k) (X) be the set of normalized atomic obli-
gation types induced when candidate X is sealed against a historical interface of depth k .
Each element is read in the counting normal form of 2.6: we quotient by the same canonical
telescope isomorphisms and retain only irreducible generating elds not uniformly synthe-
sized by the ambient calculus. Here normalization retains exactly the developer-visible data
not already exported by prior layers.     In particular, when a potential higher-dimensional
coherence problem appears with one face left free, the corresponding atomic obligation is
represented by the horn-extension type of the missing face together with a ller, rather than
by the type of llers for a completely xed boundary. Since the interface grows cumulatively,
there are inclusions
                             O(1) (X) ⊆ O(2) (X) ⊆ O(3) (X) ⊆ · · · .
Remark 4.2. The paper uses the following ve-way taxonomy.
                         COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                                      17




  Status                            Meaning
  Present obligation type        A normalized obligation type genuinely appears in some
                                 O(k) (X) and therefore belongs to the exact metatheoretic sta-
                                 bilization problem.
  Contractible obligation type   The obligation type is still present in O(k) (X), but its ber
                                 is canonically contractible; this is not yet a statement about
                                 minimal public syntax.
  Transparently derived eld     A eld is part of the sealed typing judgment but is uni-
                                 formly reconstructible from other exported data by deni-
                                 tional equality, transport, or the generic structural operations
                                 already quotiented by counting normalization.
  Eliminated from a µ-minimal A primitive eld may occur in some presentation, but every
  signature                      canonical µ-minimal normalized public signature removes it
                                 after passage through presentation equivalence and the bridge
                                 theorem.
  Absent from the obligation set No normalized obligation type of that kind occurs at all.
Obligation depth dobl is a statement about exact normalized obligation types.            Minimal-
signature depth dµ asks a dierent question, namely which primitive trace elds survive in
canonical normalized public form.       A bound on dµ therefore does not by itself produce a
chronological window. Accordingly, contractible, transparently derived, eliminated from
a minimal presentation, and absent are never used interchangeably in this paper.            The
schematic separation in     4.10 below is the motivating toy case: a depth-three horn factor
remains present in the exact obligation set, is contractible as a type, and contributes no
irreducible primitive eld to µ.

Denition 4.3 (Historical support and arity). For a normalized obligation o, let Supp(o)
be the set of sealed layers whose atomic exported schemas occur irreducibly in the counting
normal form of the typing derivation of o after each prior layer has been collapsed to its
opaque interface. Its   historical arity is
                                         a(o) := |Supp(o)|.
Remark 4.4. Historical arity counts independent prior layers, not textual age. A direct
lookup to an old exported theorem is still unary, because it lands in one opaque interface.
Multi-layer debt arises only when the new layer must cohere simultaneously with several
independent prior exports.

Lemma 4.5 (Arity-to-dimension correspondence). An irreducible obligation of historical
arity k requires a k-dimensional coherence cell. Arity 1 produces substitution or transport
data, arity 2 produces a naturality square or homotopy, and arity k ≥ 3 would require a
genuine higher ller.
Proof. With one historical input, the new layer must supply a comparison morphism between
its behavior and one prior export, so the obligation is one-dimensional. With two indepen-
dent historical inputs, the witness compares two unary composites and therefore has the
form of a square or homotopy. More generally, relating k independently supplied historical
interfaces requires a k -dimensional ller between the corresponding composites.
18                                         H. LANDE




4.2.Denition of obligation depth and minimal-signature depth.
Denition 4.6 (Obligation depth and minimal-signature depth). A foundation, equivalently
a xed extension calculus together with its sealing discipline, has obligation depth dobl if dobl
is the least integer such that for every candidate X and all k ≥ dobl there is a canonical
equivalence
                                    O(k) (X) ≃ O(dobl ) (X).
It has minimal-signature depth dµ if dµ is the least integer such that every admissible surface
                                                                      ′
extension declaration e is presentation-equivalent to a declaration e whose normalized trace
                ′
signature Ntr (e ) contains no irreducible primitive historical eld of arity greater than dµ .
       When the paper says simply coherence depth, it means obligation depth, not yet a
chronological-window theorem.

       The point of 4.6 is that beyond depth dobl , the normalized obligation types themselves
stop changing up to canonical equivalence. This is stronger than saying merely that deeper
history contributes no new minimal opaque cost or that dµ is bounded.          Once that exact
stabilization has been upgraded to a genuine chronological window, the size of the primitive
active basis interface controls the recurrence law for integration debt.

Remark 4.7.        4.6 records two depth notions.     The obligation-depth bound dobl is a sta-
bilization statement about    obligation sets ; the minimal-signature bound dµ is a statement
about canonical normalized public signatures. Neither should be read as saying that a bound
on coherence dimension automatically identies the chronological layers that must still be
inspected primitively. In particular, an arity-two obligation could in principle couple a new
layer to a remote historical layer.   To extract a genuine time window from a dimensional
bound one needs an additional factorization theorem showing that such remote binary com-
parisons are already generated by recently exported traces. In the cubical univalent case,
this passage from arity to chronology is supplied by 4.15.



4.3.Theorem A: extensional systems collapse to dobl = 1.
Theorem 4.8. In Martin-Löf type theory with UIP, the obligation depth is 1.
Proof. Under UIP, any two proofs of identity between xed endpoints are equal. Hence
every identity type is a set, and every higher identity type is a proposition; once inhabited,
it is contractible. Consider any normalized coherence obligation of dimension at least 2. By
4.5, it corresponds to a higher identity witness. But in the presence of UIP such a witness
is uniquely determined by its boundary and therefore carries no independent data. Thus
every obligation of arity at least 2 collapses to data already xed by its unary boundary.
Equivalently,
                                O(k) (X) ≃ O(1) (X)       (k ≥ 1).
Since depth 0 would mean the absence of any interaction with the current interface, which
is impossible for a nontrivial sealing step, the least stabilizing obligation depth is 1.
                         COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                                     19




4.4.   Theorem B: the xed cubical calculus has dobl = 2. From now on we specialize
the paper's xed theorem object to the fully coupled cubical extension calculus built over
the chosen CCHM-style core [CCHM18, CHM18], with univalence and Kan composition
available in the ambient operational semantics. The next ingredients are deliberately com-
plementary: an exact stabilization theorem for normalized obligation sets gives the bound
dobl ≤ 2; 4.11 gives the separate syntactic bound dµ ≤ 2 on µ-minimal public presentations;
recent-history factorization turns the exact depth bound into a genuine two-step time win-
dow; and the explicit swap obstruction together with the clutching family give lower-bound
witnesses. Together they determine exact obligation depth 2.
       Univalence and cubical computation play dierent roles in that argument. Univalence
supplies the lower-bound source of genuine binary coherence, witnessed below by the swap
obstruction and the clutching family.     It does not by itself remove primitive arity-3 trace
elds or produce exact stabilization of normalized obligation sets. Those exact-stabilization
and elimination statements use the separate cubical horn-computation package together with
recent-history factorization.
       One semantic clarication is important before the cubical argument begins. In univalent
foundations, types behave as weak ω -groupoids, so the geometric space of llers for a xed
higher boundary is not generally contractible. The paper therefore does not model a depth-
three obligation as the space of llers for a closed 3-sphere. After the normalization of 4.1,
the marginal higher-dimensional datum appears instead as a horn-extension problem: an
open box with one remote face still free.
       It is equally important to delimit the class of obligations under discussion.         The pa-
per does not claim that arbitrary internal higher-algebraic structure carried by a candidate
disappears from cubical type theory. What is measured here is only          structural integration co-
herence : the obligations induced by sealing a globally acting foundational candidate against
prior opaque layers. Those obligations arise from the chronological dependency graph of ex-
ported payload and trace data, not from arbitrary user-specied higher operations internal
to the candidate.
       Concretely, once the visible unary and binary traces have been xed, the depth-three
ber has the form                                 X
                                   H(∂) :=                   Fill∂ (γ),
                                               γ:Γmiss (∂)
where ∂ is the already exported boundary, γ is the missing remote binary face, and Fill∂ (γ)
is the type of higher llers completing the open box once γ has been chosen. This is a horn-
extension type, not a closed-ller type. In cubical type theory, the operational semantics
provide generic Kan operations such as hcomp,                comp, and transp that solve such horn-
extension problems uniformly.      The sharp question for this paper is therefore syntactic:
does a eld of that shape survive as an irreducible trace eld in a µ-minimal normalized
public signature, or can it be replaced denitionally by a term synthesized from lower-arity
boundary data?

Lemma 4.9 (Syntactic horn reduction for structural integration coherence). Let X be a
foundational core candidate sealed at stage n + 1 in the xed fully coupled cubical extension
calculus. For every k ≥ 3 and every boundary ∂ : O(k−1) (X), the additional data exposed by
adjoining the remote layer Ln−k+1 are canonically represented by a horn-extension ber
                                                  X
                                   Hk (∂) :=                 Fill∂ (γ).
                                                  (k)
                                               γ:Γmiss (∂)
20                                        H. LANDE




Here γ is the new remote comparison face between X and Ln−k+1 , while every other face of
the box is already exported by the unary and binary traces of the intervening sealed layers.
Proof. By construction, O(k) (X) records only structural integration obligations induced by
sealing X against opaque prior layers. Earlier layers therefore contribute only their exported
payload and trace schemas; arbitrary higher-algebraic structure internal to those layers
is invisible at sealing time.   Passing from depth   k − 1 to depth k exposes exactly one
additional remote layer, namely    Ln−k+1 .   By                           X contributes
                                                   2.22, the global action of
exactly one interaction site for each newly exposed generator.       Meanwhile, because the
intermediate layers were already sealed, their exports already contain the unary bridges
and binary comparison traces linking that remote layer to the more recent history. After
normalization, all visible faces of the resulting comparison cube are therefore xed except the
direct face comparing the action of X with the newly exposed remote layer. The remaining
datum is precisely that missing face together with the higher ller certifying compatibility
with the already exported boundary. This is exactly the displayed horn-extension ber.


A concrete cubical sketch. The abstract distinction between payload and trace can be made
visible in a small cubical example.   Suppose an older sealed layer exports a small Tarski
universe with function codes and their decoding equation. A new cohesive layer contributes
a genuinely new modal payload Flat together with its unit eta.        Everything else needed
to make that modality act on the older universe is integration trace:       a lifted action on
old codes, a comparison between decoding before or after lifting, and the distribution law
over old function codes. In the snippet below, the witness remote-face is the point of the
example. It is not additional payload. It is exactly the missing comparison face of the open
3-box determined by the old decoding law together with the new unary and binary trace
data, and cubical composition computes it uniformly.

       -- Schematic Cubical Agda: old universe + new payload + induced trace

       record OldU : Set1 where
         field
           U      : Set
           El     : U -> Set
           Arr    : U -> U -> U
           El-Arr : (A B : U) ->
             Path Set (El (Arr A B)) (El A -> El B)

       record Payload : Set1 where
         field
           Flat : Set -> Set
           eta : {A : Set} -> A -> Flat A

       record Trace (L : OldU) (P : Payload) : Set1 where
         open OldU L
         open Payload P
         field
           FlatU         : U -> U
           flat-El       : (A : U) ->
                       COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                               21




              Path Set (El (FlatU A)) (Flat (El A))
            flat-code-Arr : (A B : U) ->
              Path U (FlatU (Arr A B)) (Arr (FlatU A) (FlatU B))
            flat-Arr      : (A B : U) ->
              Path Set (Flat (El A -> El B))
                       (Flat (El A) -> Flat (El B))

       module _ (L : OldU) (P : Payload) (T : Trace L P) where
         open OldU L
         open Payload P
         open Trace T

          -- left route:
          -- El (FlatU (Arr A B))
          --     -> Flat (El (Arr A B))
          --     -> Flat (El A -> El B)
          --     -> Flat (El A) -> Flat (El B)

          -- right route:
          -- El (FlatU (Arr A B))
          --     -> El (Arr (FlatU A) (FlatU B))
          --     -> El (FlatU A) -> El (FlatU B)
          --     -> Flat (El A) -> Flat (El B)

          postulate
            left-route :
              (A B : U) ->
              Path Set (El (FlatU (Arr A B))) (Flat (El A) -> Flat (El B))
            right-route :
              (A B : U) ->
              Path Set (El (FlatU (Arr A B))) (Flat (El A) -> Flat (El B))

         -- The open 3-box says these two boundary composites agree.
         -- This face is transparently derived trace, not new payload.
         remote-face :
           (A B : U) ->
           Path (Path Set (El (FlatU (Arr A B)))
                            (Flat (El A) -> Flat (El B)))
                 (left-route A B) (right-route A B)
         remote-face A B = hcomp ...
    Read top-to-bottom, Payload is the human-authored new content, while Trace is the
compatibility debt forced by sealing against the old universe. The two routes are the two
composites from El   (FlatU (Arr A B)) to Flat (El A) -> Flat (El B). The marginal
depth-3 obligation is not the space of llers for a closed boundary. It is the horn-extension
type whose free component is the remote comparison between those composites and whose
second component is the 3-cell certifying compatibility with the displayed boundary. In a
cubical presentation this total extension type is canonically contractible:   hcomp computes
22                                           H. LANDE




the missing face and hfill packages the accompanying ller. The extra factor is therefore
present but contractible, rather than absent.

Remark 4.10 (Toy separation of dobl and dµ ). The cubical sketch above isolates the sep-
aration direction relevant for this paper. Fix A, B : U and let ∂(A, B) be the lower-arity
boundary built from flat-El, flat-code-Arr, and flat-Arr. The exact depth-3 obligation
over that boundary is
                                                  X
                           H3 (∂(A, B)) :=                      Fill∂(A,B) (ρ),
                                             ρ:Γmiss (∂(A,B))

whose rst component is the would-be remote comparison eld remote-face. Cubical com-
position makes H3 (∂(A, B)) canonically contractible, so this higher obligation is still present
in O
       (3) (X) even though it contributes no new irreducible primitive eld to any µ-minimal

normalized trace signature. In counting terms, the depth-3 step adds an exact contractible
horn factor but zero new units to µ. This is why 4.13 and 4.11 are stated separately: even
when the two depth bounds both land at 2, they measure dierent layers of structure.

Theorem 4.11 (Higher-coherence elimination from minimal public signatures). Let e be an
admissible surface extension declaration over Bn . Then there exists a presentation-equivalent
declaration
                                               e′ ≈ e
whose normalized trace signature Ntr (e′ ) contains no irreducible historical eld of arity k ≥ 3.
Equivalently, every canonical µ-minimal normalized public signature contains only unary and
binary primitive historical trace elds. More concretely, if a presented eld of arity k ≥ 3
occurs in some surface declaration, then within the canonical trace-presentation interface it
is transparently derived from its lower-arity boundary data and may be replaced by a term
synthesized using cubical Kan operations, specically hcomp, transp, and the accompanying
ller operation hfill. This is an elimination statement about µ-minimal normalized public
signatures, not a claim that the corresponding exact obligation types are absent from O(k) (X).
The cubical operations synthesize the replacement witness; the bridge theorem 3.5 upgrades
that witness to a presentation-equivalent minimal signature.
Proof. Fix any surface presentation of e and any primitive historical trace clause ϕ of arity
k ≥ 3 occurring in its elaborated sealed export. By             3.1, this clause is part of the public
typing judgment before counting normalization, and by                3.2 any irreducible contribution
it makes would have to survive in the canonical normalized trace signature. By               4.9, the
additional datum contributed by that arity-k step is a horn-extension ber Hk (∂) over a
boundary ∂ already exported by lower-arity trace elds. Cubical Kan structure computes
a canonical witness of that ber from the boundary alone:              hcomp synthesizes the missing
remote face, transp aligns the comparison along the relevant boundary transport, and hfill
packages the resulting higher ller.
     Pass from the chosen surface presentation to its canonical normalized trace signature
via section 3, and apply   3.5 to the presented eld corresponding to ϕ. The theorem shows
that within that canonical presentation interface the eld is transparently derived from lower-
arity boundary data and contributes no irreducible primitive trace schema. Since any surface
declaration contains only nitely many primitive clauses of arity at least 3, repeating this
                                                                                    ′
reasoning for each such clause yields a presentation-equivalent declaration e whose canonical
normalized trace signature contains no irreducible historical eld of arity k ≥ 3. By 3.4, the
same canonical normalized trace signature is attached to every representative of that class.
                        COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                                        23




That is exactly the stated elimination claim, and it is on that canonical signature that µ(e)
is computed.

Corollary 4.12. In the xed fully coupled cubical extension calculus, the minimal-signature
depth satises dµ ≤ 2.
Proof. 4.11 shows that every admissible surface extension declaration is presentation-equivalent
to one whose normalized trace signature contains no irreducible historical eld of arity k ≥ 3.
This is exactly the dening condition for dµ ≤ 2 in           4.6.



4.4.1. Exact stabilization above depth 2.
Theorem 4.13 (Exact depth-two stabilization of obligation sets). In the xed fully coupled
cubical extension calculus, for every foundational core candidate X and every k ≥ 2 there is
a canonical equivalence
                                   O(k) (X) ≃ O(2) (X).
Hence the obligation depth is at most 2.
Proof. The case k = 2 is tautological. Let k = 3. By 4.5 and 4.9, the marginal higher-
dimensional datum is a 3-cell presented pointwise over a depth-two boundary ∂ : O
                                                                                                (2) (X)

as the horn-extension type
                                                  X
                                   H3 (∂) :=                 Fill∂ (γ),
                                               γ:Γmiss (∂)
where γ is the missing remote binary face and Fill∂ (γ) is the type of 3-cells completing the
open box once γ has been chosen.
    In cubical type theory, Kan composition solves such horn-extension problems uniformly.
The operation hcomp computes a canonical missing face from the visible boundary data,
and hfill supplies the corresponding ller [CCHM18, CHM18]. Therefore each ber H3 (∂)
is contractible. Equivalently, O
                                   (3) (X) is a dependent sum over O (2) (X) with contractible

bers, so
                                   O(3) (X) ≃ O(2) (X).
    Now let k > 3. By 4.9, passing from depth k − 1 to depth k again adjoins only a horn-
extension ber Hk (∂) over each ∂ : O
                                      (k−1) (X): one more remote comparison face together

with a ller against boundary data already exported by lower layers. The same cubical Kan
operations contract that ber. Hence

                                     O(k) (X) ≃ O(k−1) (X)
for every k ≥ 3, and iterating yields O
                                           (k) (X) ≃ O (2) (X) for all k ≥ 2. Separately,           4.9
together with the bridge theorem 3.5 yields the surface-syntactic corollary recorded in 4.11:
any arity-k   ≥ 3 trace witness is a denitional shadow of lower-arity boundary data and
therefore disappears from a µ-minimal public presentation.                In the taxonomy of   4.2, the
higher exact obligation types remain present but contractible at the metatheoretic level, and
only the bridge theorem turns that fact into elimination from µ-minimal syntax.

Corollary 4.14 (Contractible-factor decomposition). For every foundational core candi-
date X and every k ≥ 2 there is a canonical equivalence
                               O(k) (X) ≃ O(2) (X) × Ck (X),
24                                          H. LANDE




where C2 (X) := 1 and, for k > 2, Ck (X) is the iterated chain of canonical remote horn
factors selected by the cubical compositions used in the proof of 4.13. Each Ck (X) is
canonically contractible. Equivalently, the projection to the depth-two boundary trivializes
the higher exact data as a contractible remote factor: the extra higher layer remains present
in the exact obligation set, but the quotient that identies each remote horn chain with its
canonical center recovers precisely O(2) (X).
Proof. The proof of 4.13 is iterative: each passage from depth j to depth j + 1 adjoins one
horn-extension ber over already exported boundary data, and cubical composition supplies
a canonical center of that ber. Iterating those chosen centers trivializes the resulting de-
pendent family into a product of the depth-two boundary with a remote-factor chain Ck (X).
Each stage of that chain is contractible by the same Kan-composition argument used in
 4.13, so the whole factor Ck (X) is canonically contractible. Projecting away that factor
yields the displayed equivalence, and collapsing each factor to its chosen center gives the
stated quotient description.

Theorem 4.15 (Recent-history factorization). In the xed fully coupled cubical extension
calculus, every binary trace eld that survives in a µ-minimal normalized public signature
at stage n + 1 factors through the previous two normalized signatures. More precisely, let
X be a candidate added at stage n + 1. Once the unary and binary trace data of X against
Ln and Ln−1 have been xed, every comparison between X and a remote layer Ln−r with
r ≥ 2 is denitionally equal to a term obtained by iterating the factorization through the
already exported unary bridges and binary comparison traces of the intervening normalized
signatures. Consequently no µ-minimal public signature contains a primitive remote binary
eld. This is a chronological factorization statement about surviving primitive elds, not an
exact claim that remote binary obligation types are absent from O(2) (X).
Proof. Start with the rst nonadjacent layer Ln−2 . By 3.9 applied to the sealed exports
of Ln and Ln−1 , the next factorization step may be read entirely from explicit public trace
data. In particular, the export of Ln includes the adjacent unary bridge

                                       fn : Ln → Ln−1 ,
the export of Ln−1 includes the adjacent unary bridge

                                    gn−1 : Ln−1 → Ln−2 ,
and the binary part of the trace of Ln contains a 2-cell

                                     αn : gn−1 ◦ fn ⇒ hn
recording the induced comparison     hn : Ln → Ln−2 .      The degenerate composition faces
needed to assemble the next open box are part of the same factorization-complete export,
in the sense of   3.8, because counting normalization treats them as transparent structural
data rather than as fresh primitive elds. When X is sealed against the last two layers, it
additionally xes unary comparisons

                            xn : X → Ln ,       xn−1 : X → Ln−1 ,
and a binary coherence square
                                         βn : fn ◦ xn ⇒ xn−1 .
The cells xn , xn−1 , fn , gn−1 , αn , and βn , together with the evident degenerate composition
faces, determine an open 3-box. The marginal obligation is not merely a bare remote face;
                        COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                                25




it is the horn-extension type
                                              X
                          Hn−2 :=                              Fill(γn−2 ),
                                    γn−2 :hn ◦xn ⇒gn−1 ◦xn−1

whose rst component is precisely the comparison

                                γn−2 : hn ◦ xn ⇒ gn−1 ◦ xn−1
between the two composites from X to Ln−2 , and whose second component is the 3-cell
lling the box once that face is chosen. Cubical Kan lling computes this horn-extension
term from the displayed boundary data:      hcomp synthesizes the missing face and hfill the
accompanying ller. Thus the comparison with Ln−2 factors through the already exported
signature of Ln together with the adjacent bridge carried by Ln−1 ; it does not survive as a
new primitive remote eld in a µ-minimal presentation.
    The same argument now iterates. Suppose inductively that the comparison from X
to Ln−r+1 has already been factored through the recent history. Apply 3.9 to the sealed
layer Ln−r+1 . Its normalized public trace export already supplies the adjacent unary bridge
to Ln−r , the corresponding binary comparison trace for the composite through Ln−r , and the
transparently generated degenerate faces needed to assemble the next open 3-box. Combin-
ing that explicit exported data with the already factored comparison for X yields another
horn-extension ber over visible boundary data.        Cubical Kan lling computes that ber
again, yielding a comparison from X to Ln−r which factors through the normalized public
signature of Ln−r+1 . Inductively, every remote binary comparison is therefore a denitional
consequence of the trace data already exported by the recent history, and      4.11 removes it
from any µ-minimal signature as a primitive eld.

Corollary 4.16 (Two-layer chronological window). In the xed fully coupled cubical exten-
sion calculus, every sealing step at stage n + 1 has a genuine chronological window of size 2:
all primitive obligations are generated by the exported traces of Ln and Ln−1 , while compar-
isons with layers Ln−r for r ≥ 2 factor through those two normalized signatures and are then
synthesized by iterated Kan lling. Equivalently, the pair (Ln , Ln−1 ) forms a chronological
Markov blanket for subsequent sealing.
Proof. 4.13 shows the exact obligation-set stabilization O(k) (X) ≃ O(2) (X) for all k ≥ 2.
 4.15 upgrades that dimensional statement to a temporal one: every surviving binary clause
factors through the normalized signatures of the last two layers, so remote history contributes
only boundary data already mediated by those exports. Hence primitive sealing data are
exhausted by S(Ln ) ⊎ S(Ln−1 ), and all deeper history contributes only derived llers.



4.4.2. Lower bound: explicit binary obstruction (d ≥ 2).
Theorem 4.17 (Explicit binary sealing obstruction). Let the active interface of a fully
coupled univalent foundation export the two-point type 2 and the univalent path
                                  pswap := ua(swap) : 2 ≡ 2.
Then there exists a globally acting promoted interface candidate whose unary clauses do not
determine its sealing: sealing induces a genuine binary obligation over pswap . Consequently
the obligation depth is at least 2.
26                                         H. LANDE




Proof. Consider the promoted interface candidate X whose advertised payload is a global
endomap package
                                       f : ΠA:U A → A.
At the current sealing stage, primitive clauses need only be supplied against the active
exported interface. To specify one unary clause of this advertised action, choose

                                    f2 := λ_.left : 2 → 2.
Because X is advertised as globally acting, sealing it against the active interface requires
coherence not only on objects but also along exported paths in U . The path pswap therefore
induces the binary obligation

                          αswap : transportλA. A→A (pswap , f2 ) ≡ f2 .
Univalence computes transport in the endomorphism family by conjugation with swap, so

               transportλA. A→A (pswap , f2 ) = swap ◦ f2 ◦ swap−1 = λ_.right.
Hence αswap is exactly the type

                                   (λ_.right) ≡ (λ_.left),
which is impossible because evaluation at left would force right = left.     Thus the passage
from depth 1 to depth 2 introduces a genuine new sealing obligation type: the unary clause
f2 does not determine whether X is admissible, because the typechecker must still ask for
the binary witness αswap .
    Therefore O
                (2) (X) contains a binary obligation not already present in O (1) (X), so the

ambient foundation cannot have obligation depth 1. Equivalently, univalence exposes binary
sealing sites that are invisible to unary data alone. This is the same obstruction formalized
in Metatheory/AdjunctionBarrier.agda by the nontriviality of swap-path and the contra-
diction theorem depth1-insufficient. Hence dobl ≥ 2.

Remark 4.18 (Adjunction as categorical reading). The triangle identities of an adjunc-
tion exhibit the same binary pattern at a categorical level: once the object part and the
unit/counit data have been xed, the remaining triangle coherence compares composites
already determined at arity 1.    The paper uses adjunctions in that explanatory role only.
The internal lower-bound theorem of the extension calculus is the swap obstruction above.



4.4.3. Topological exact family: clutching constructions.
Theorem 4.19 (Clutching family). The HIT clutching presentation over S 2 furnishes an
exact depth-2 witness: a genuine binary comparison is necessary to specify the bundle data,
but no independent primitive arity-3 obligation occurs.
Proof. We translate the clutching construction into higher-inductive syntax. In homotopy
type theory, the 2-sphere is the suspension S
                                                2 := ΣS 1 , generated by point constructors

                                           N, S : S 2
and a path constructor
                                    merid : S 1 → (N ≡ S)
 [Uni13, CHM18].    To specify an exported layer whose total space is a principal bundle
      2
over S , it suces to dene a type family

                                         P : S 2 → U.
                          COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                               27




By the dependent eliminator for the suspension, such a family is determined by exactly three
pieces of data:
                                                                     
                          PN : U,     PS : U,      γ : Πx:S 1 PN ≡ PS .
By univalence, the last component may equally be read as a family of equivalences between
the two pole bers, which is the type-theoretic clutching datum.
    Now S
             1 is itself a higher inductive type generated by a point base and a loop loop :

base ≡ base.      Therefore giving γ requires exactly two layers of information:    rst a base
equivalence
                                   γ(base) : PN ≡ PS ,
which is unary data, and second a path over loop identifying the two transports induced by
that equivalence around the circle. That second datum is a genuine binary coherence cell: it
compares two unary composites and cannot be recovered from the endpoints alone. Hence
depth 1 does not suce.
    Crucially, the HIT signature of S
                                         2 contains no constructor of dimension 3 or higher.
                                       2
Accordingly, the elimination rule for S asks for no primitive input beyond the two point data
and the path family γ above. Once the binary path-over-loop has been supplied, any further
compatibility condition appears only as a horn-extension problem over the already displayed
eliminator boundary. By the same cubical lling argument used above, that higher extension
type is computed from the boundary and therefore disappears from every µ-minimal public
presentation by     4.11. Thus the clutching presentation furnishes an exact depth-2 witness.



Corollary 4.20. In the xed fully coupled cubical extension calculus considered above, the
obligation depth is exactly 2.
Proof. 4.13 provides the exact stabilization statement by showing the obligation-set equiv-
alence O
           (k) (X) ≃ O (2) (X) for all k ≥ 2, and 4.11 turns that equivalence into the syntactic

statement that no µ-minimal public signature needs primitive arity-3 data.      4.15 shows that
this depth-two exact-stabilization statement is realized by a genuine two-layer chronological
window rather than merely by a bound on cell dimension.           4.17 and   4.19 provide lower
bounds by exhibiting genuine depth-two phenomena that do not collapse in the univalent
setting. Therefore the least stabilizing obligation depth is 2.




                           5. The complexity scaling theorem

Let en be the admissible surface extension declaration whose sealing exports the nth sealed
layer Ln , and write
                                          µn := µ(en )
for its minimal opaque cost, and let κn be its core payload size. By      3.7, µn is exactly the
abstract sealing cost ∆(X(en ) | Bn−1 ), but it is phrased on canonical normalized public
signatures and is therefore presentation-invariant by construction. The recurrence theorem
is applied below together with the obligation-depth statement of 4.6, but its formal counted-
interface package only needs a theorem identifying a genuine chronological window. In the
depth-two cubical univalent case, this is exactly     4.16; in the UIP case, the proof of    4.8
shows that all non-unary comparisons collapse to their boundary, so the window is one layer.
28                                                   H. LANDE




More generally, whenever a foundation has obligation depth dobl realized by a chronological
window of size dobl , any depth-dobl historical basis of the preceding layers has the form


                                       (d      )
                                                       ]−1
                                                     dobl
                                        obl
                                     In,bas =                  Sbas (Ln−j ).
                                                      j=0
By 2.17, its cardinality is independent of the basis families used to write the coproduct. Thus
the recurrence counts the well-dened irreducible basis cardinality of the active interface
rather than the raw number of exported generators. For the initial bootstrap stages before
the full window has been populated, we adopt the natural convention that nonexistent earlier
layers contribute the empty interface.


5.1.The universal ane recurrence.
Theorem 5.1 (Universal ane recurrence for minimal opaque cost). For every foundation
whose obligation depth dobl is realized by a chronological window of size dobl , the minimal
opaque cost satises
                                     dobl
                                      X   −1
                                                                     
                          µn+1 =                   µn−j + κn−j           (n ≥ dobl ).
                                      j=0

Proof. By 3.7, the next minimal opaque cost is the abstract sealing cost, so 2.22 identies
it with the size of the active basis interface:
                                                          obl  (d    )
                                               µn+1 = |In,bas |.
Using the tagged coproduct decomposition of 2.16,
                                                     dobl −1
                                   (dobl )
                                                      X
                                 |In,bas   |=                  |Sbas (Ln−j )|.
                                                      j=0
Now apply 3.7, equivalently the Integration Trace Principle 2.23, which gives

                                     |Sbas (Ln−j )| = µn−j + κn−j
for each j . Substituting yields the claimed ane recurrence.

       For later comparison, write
                                                            n
                                                            X
                                                    τn :=           µi
                                                            i=1
for the cumulative minimal opaque cost through stage n.


5.2.Ane one-step growth at d = 1.
Corollary 5.2. If the obligation depth is 1, this depth is realized by a one-layer chronological
window, and every layer contributes the same core payload size c, then
                                               µn+1 = µn + c.
If moreover the initial state exports no prior sealed layers, then
                                     µ1 = 0,             µn = (n − 1)c,
                         COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                               29




and therefore
                                                 n(n − 1)
                                        τn = c            .
                                                    2
Minimal opaque cost therefore grows linearly. The cumulative opaque cost grows quadrati-
cally.
Proof. Substitute d = 1 into 5.1. Then only the term j = 0 remains, so
                                        µn+1 = µn + κn .
Under the uniform payload assumption κn = c, this becomes µn+1 = µn + c. If the initial
state exports no prior sealed layers, then the rst sealing step sees the empty interface and
therefore has minimal opaque cost µ1 = 0. Induction gives µn = (n − 1)c, and summing this
arithmetic progression yields the stated formula for τn .



5.3.   Ane Fibonacci scaling at d = 2. By 4.16, the xed cubical depth-two theorem is
chronologically realized by the two most recent sealed traces.
       Assume in this subsection that every sealed layer contributes the same core payload
size c, and write (Fn )n≥1 for the Fibonacci sequence with F1 = F2 = 1.

Corollary 5.3 (Ane Fibonacci recurrence). In the xed fully coupled cubical extension
calculus, if the obligation depth is 2 and every sealed layer contributes core payload size c,
then
                                    µn+1 = µn + µn−1 + 2c.
If we dene
                                         Un := µn + 2c,
then
                                      Un+1 = Un + Un−1 .
If moreover the initial state exports no prior sealed layers, then
                                      µ1 = 0,        µ2 = c,
so
                              Un = cFn+2 ,        µn = c(Fn+2 − 2),
and the cumulative opaque cost satises
                                    τn = c(Fn+4 − 2n − 3).
Proof. The recurrence is the case d = 2 of 5.1 together with the uniform payload assumption
κn = c, giving
                                    µn+1 = µn + µn−1 + 2c.
Adding 2c to both sides yields
                                      Un+1 = Un + Un−1 .
       If the initial state exports no prior sealed layers, then the rst layer has no earlier
interface against which to cohere, so µ1 = 0.       The second layer sees only the rst layer's
export, whose size is κ1 + µ1 = c, hence µ2 = c. Therefore

                              U1 = 2c = cF3 ,       U2 = 3c = cF4 .
30                                           H. LANDE




Since both (Un ) and (cFn+2 ) satisfy the same Fibonacci recurrence and agree at n = 1, 2,
induction gives Un = cFn+2 . Subtracting 2c yields

                                         µn = c(Fn+2 − 2).
Summing from i = 1 to n gives
                                   n
                                   X
                          τn = c     (Fi+2 − 2) = c(Fn+4 − 2n − 3),
                                   i=1
using the standard Fibonacci summation identity.

Corollary 5.4 (Asymptotic ination factor). Under the bootstrap and uniform-payload hy-
potheses of 5.3, the structural ination factor
                                                    µn
                                           Φn :=
                                                   µn−1
converges to the Golden Ratio                    √
                                              1+ 5
                                           φ=      .
                                                2
Proof. Under the bootstrap assumptions of 5.3,
                                            µn    Fn+2 − 2
                                    Φn =        =          .
                                           µn−1   Fn+1 − 2
The additive constants are asymptotically negligible relative to the Fibonacci growth, so the
standard ratio convergence gives Φn → φ.



5.4.    Metatheoretic robustness and universality across 2D foundations. The count-
ing notions used above are not source-level line counts. They are dimensions of the sealed
typing judgment after passage to the counting normal form of          2.6.   The rst corollary
records that robustness explicitly.

Corollary 5.5 (Robustness under admissible refactoring). Let two presentations of the
same sealed payload or obligation judgment be related by canonical telescope isomorphism:
rebundling or splitting dependent records, reassociation of Σ-types, currying or uncurrying it-
erated function arguments, or transparent internal normalization that does not change which
elds are primitively inhabited. Then the induced sets of atomic payload schemas, atomic
obligations, and historical supports are canonically bijective. In particular, the quantities
κ(X), ∆(X | B), and a(o) are unchanged, and for surface declarations the induced minimal
opaque cost µ(e) is unchanged as well.
Proof. All of the listed refactorings preserve the same dependent typing judgment and dier
only by canonical rebracketing or transparent elaboration of its telescope. After attening
the Σ-spine and discarding uniformly synthesized elds, both presentations reduce to the
same counting normal form of 2.6 and 4.1. The atomic payload generators, atomic obliga-
tions, and their supporting layer indices therefore correspond bijectively. Since the paper's
metrics are cardinalities of those normal-form sets, they are invariant under such refactor-
ings.    The corresponding trace subfamilies of normalized public signatures are therefore
canonically bijective as well, so 3.4 gives the invariance of µ.
                          COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                             31




      The cubical depth-two theorem can now be separated into two abstract layers.        The
stronger one is a   horn-computational interface: it packages exactly the hypotheses that turn
cubical exact stabilization of obligation sets into the bridge statement that higher trace
elds disappear from µ-minimal syntax. The weaker one keeps only the primitive/window
and exact-stabilization data needed for the depth-two ane law. In this paper the stronger
horn-computational package is instantiated only for the chosen CCHM-style cubical core,
while the weaker exact/window wrapper also supports the explicit strict/brant 2LTT-style
toy discipline.

Theorem 5.6 (Abstract horn-computational foundation interface). Let a fully coupled foun-
dation satisfy the following package.
(1) For every candidate X , every k ≥ 3, and every boundary ∂ : O
                                                                      (k−1) (X), the depth-k

    obligation over ∂ is canonically represented by a horn-extension ber
                                                  X
                                   Hk (∂) :=                 Fill∂ (γ),
                                                  (k)
                                               γ:Γmiss (∂)

      and there is a canonical equivalence
                                                   X
                                  O(k) (X) ≃                   Hk (∂).
                                               ∂:O(k−1) (X)

(2) Every horn-extension ber Hk (∂) of Property (1) is canonically contractible.
(3) Every admissible surface extension declaration admits a canonical normalized trace pre-
    sentation, together with presentation equivalence and primitive-versus-derived tagging on
    its trace elds.
(4) In the canonical presentation of Property (3), every historical trace eld of arity k ≥ 3
    corresponding to a horn factor of Property (1) is marked transparently derived, and com-
    putational replacement by the canonically synthesized horn witness preserves the canon-
    ical normalized trace presentation.
(5) Primitive historical support factors through the previous two normalized signatures: ev-
    ery primitive eld in a canonical normalized trace presentation depends only on the last
    two layers up to the factorization relation of 3.8.
Then the foundation satises all three conclusions below.
(1) For every candidate X and every k ≥ 2 there is a canonical equivalence

                                      O(k) (X) ≃ O(2) (X).
(2) Every admissible surface extension declaration is presentation-equivalent to one whose
    normalized trace signature contains no irreducible historical eld of arity k ≥ 3.
(3) Primitive historical support factors through a chronological window of size 2.

In particular, the exact obligation-depth bound dobl ≤ 2 and the minimal-signature bound
dµ ≤ 2 both hold.
Proof. By Property (1), each passage from depth k − 1 to depth k with k ≥ 3 decomposes
the exact obligation set into a depth-(k − 1) boundary together with one horn factor. Prop-
erty (2) makes that horn factor contractible, so the projection to the boundary is a canonical
equivalence. Iterating from depth k down to depth 2 yields

                                      O(k) (X) ≃ O(2) (X)
32                                         H. LANDE




for every candidate X and every k     ≥ 2, which is exactly the claimed exact stabilization
above depth 2.
      Property (5) is already the required two-layer chronological-window statement for prim-
itive support. For the surface-syntactic conclusion, x an admissible surface declaration e
and any primitive historical eld ϕ of arity k ≥ 3 occurring in one chosen presentation. By
Property (3), its contribution may be read on the canonical normalized trace presentation
attached to e. By Property (4), the corresponding canonical eld is marked transparently
derived and may be replaced by the horn-computed witness without changing the canonical
normalized trace presentation. Hence ϕ contributes no irreducible primitive trace schema
in any µ-minimal representative.    Repeating this nite replacement for each arity-k    ≥ 3
eld yields a presentation-equivalent declaration whose normalized trace signature has no
irreducible historical eld above arity 2. This is exactly the asserted elimination statement,
and by 4.6 it gives dµ ≤ 2.

Corollary 5.7 (Cubical instantiation of the horn-computational interface). The xed fully
coupled cubical extension calculus over the chosen CCHM-style core satises the package
of 5.6. Consequently 4.13, 4.11, and 4.16 are the concrete instance of that abstract
horn-computational theorem pattern checked in this paper.
Proof. Property (1) is exactly the horn-reduction description of 4.9; Property (2) is the
cubical contractibility argument used in 4.13 and 4.14; Property (3) is the canonical trace-
presentation interface supplied by section 3 together with the explicit presentation interface
of    3.5; Property (4) is the computational-replacement clause of   3.5; and Property (5) is
the recent-history factorization theorem   4.16. Therefore   5.6 applies to the chosen cubical
calculus.

      The theorem above is intentionally stronger than the exact-depth wrapper used below:
it includes the canonical trace-presentation and computational-replacement clauses needed
to transport horn computation all the way to elimination from µ-minimal syntax. The next
theorem forgets that bridge data and keeps only the weaker primitive/window and exact-
stabilization package formalized in Metatheory/TwoDFoundations.agda; that is the level at
which the separate strict/brant 2LTT-style discipline is checked.

Theorem 5.8 (Depth-two law for 2D foundations). Let a fully coupled foundation satisfy
the following two properties.
(1) There exists a candidate X whose normalized binary obligation set is not canonically
    equivalent to its unary one:
                                     O(2) (X) ̸≃ O(1) (X).
(2)   For every candidate X and every k ≥ 2, there is a canonical equivalence
                                     O(k) (X) ≃ O(2) (X),
    and every surviving binary clause factors through a chronological window of size 2.
Then the foundation has obligation depth 2. Under the uniform payload hypothesis κn = c,
its minimal opaque cost satises
                                   µn+1 = µn + µn−1 + 2c,
so the shifted sequence Un := µn + 2c is Fibonacci. The hypotheses concern exact obliga-
tion stabilization together with chronology; any separate elimination theorem for µ-minimal
signatures is additional structure, not part of this abstract wrapper.
                          COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                               33




Proof. Property (2) gives exact stabilization O(k) (X) ≃ O(2) (X) for all k ≥ 2 together with
a genuine two-layer chronological window. Hence       4.6 and   5.1 imply that the obligation
depth is at most 2 and that the recurrence is the depth-two ane law. Property (1) excludes
obligation depth 1. Hence the least stabilizing obligation depth is exactly 2, and substituting
dobl = 2 and κn = c into 5.1 gives the displayed formula. The Fibonacci shift is exactly the
argument of 5.3.

Corollary 5.9 (A concrete 2LTT instantiation). There is a concrete strict/brant 2LTT-
style extension discipline satisfying the hypotheses of 5.8. In that discipline, arities 0 and 1
carry no primitive obligations, arity 2 carries a primitive brant binary comparison, every
arity k ≥ 3 carries the same comparison schema but only as transparently derived data, and
every surviving primitive support factors through the previous two layers. Consequently this
discipline has obligation depth 2 and chronological window size 2. No claim is made here
that it also satises the stronger horn-computational bridge package of 5.6.
Proof. Take the explicit strict/brant discipline just described. Since the binary comparison
is primitive while the unary layer is empty, Property (1) of      5.8 holds.   For every k ≥ 2,
the obligation family is the same binary comparison schema, so the exact stabilization part
of Property (2) is immediate; and because its support is xed to the last two layers, the
size-two chronological window is immediate as well. Therefore       5.8 applies. The accompa-
nying mechanization packages this instance in Metatheory/TwoLTTFoundations.agda via
two-level-primitive-window-2d-foundation, two-level-2d-foundation, two-level-depth-two-law-for
and two-level-window-size-two-for-2d-foundations.

Remark 5.10 (Why plain HoTT is not claimed here). The identity-elimination principle
of the HoTT book reduces families over a variable path to the reexivity constructor, but
it does not by itself collapse loop-indexed families with xed endpoints to the reexivity
case [Uni13].    The horn-extension problems governing     4.9 therefore do not automatically
reduce in plain Book HoTT to the cubical boundary computations used in Properties (1)(2)
of     5.6. For that reason the paper does not claim that plain HoTT instantiates      5.6, nor
even that it satises the weaker exact/window hypothesis of Property (2) in        5.8; for this
paper it remains an open direction rather than a theorem-level corollary.

       For the chosen CCHM-style cubical core,   5.7 veries the stronger horn-computational
package of      5.6.   The weaker theorem   5.8 deliberately forgets the canonical-trace and
computational-replacement clauses and keeps only the exact/window data needed for the
ane law; that is why the strict/brant 2LTT-style discipline of       5.9 can instantiate   5.8
without being claimed to satisfy     5.6.   Plain HoTT remains outside both theorem-level
instantiations in this paper.



                              6. Cubical Agda mechanization


6.1.   Mechanizing the theorem package. The formalization is organized around the xed
extension calculus of section 2, its horn-computational abstraction layer, its depth theorems,
the induced recurrence law, and the clutching construction. Table 3 rst makes the trusted
34                                            H. LANDE




                     Table 2: Scope of the paper's generalization claims.

 Foundation                  Binary      lower Exact stabilization Bridge to µ           Claimed
                             bound             / window                                  here?
 Chosen CCHM-style cu- yes; explicit swap yes; horn reduc-              yes; replacement yes
 bical core / Cubical and clutching wit- tion, stabilization,           interface formal-
 Agda realization      nesses             and recent-history            ized,        surface-
                                          factorization                 to-interface
                                                                        normalization
                                                                        paper-level
 Other cubical variants      only if a binary     only      if     the only       if     the no
                             witness is checked   horn-reduction,       canonical-trace
                             case by case         contractible-ber, bridge clauses of
                                                  and          window 5.6 are veried
                                                  clauses of 5.6 are
                                                  veried
 Explicit   strict/brant yes;     concrete       yes; exact stabiliza- not supplied here; yes, for
 2LTT-style discipline    primitive binary        tion and size-two only the weaker that dis-
                          witness                 window checked        wrapper 5.8 is cipline
                                                                        claimed               only
 Plain Book HoTT             no theorem iso-      no     cubical-style no                     no
                             lated here           exact-stabilization
                                                  argument supplied
                                                  here


boundary local. Here      fully formalized means that the paper's statement is realized directly
in the cited Agda modules;       formalized abstractly, read through bridge means that the Agda
development proves the structural theorem and the paper reads it through the normalization
and canonical-presentation results of section 3; and      paper-level only marks the bridge layer
itself. In particular,    3.5 is fully formalized on explicit canonical trace presentations. The
paper-level part of the bridge is the surface-to-interface normalization package of section 3,
namely the path from raw declarations to that canonical presentation interface. The itemized
map after the table records the exact paper-to-Agda theorem correspondence.
• 2.12 corresponds exactly to Metatheory/InterfaceCalculus.agda via transparent-growth-keeps-library-state,
  transparent-definitions-preserve-active-interface, transparent-definitions-have-zero-integration-la
  and transparent-user-level-code-lies-outside-the-recurrence.
• 2.17 is a paper-level niteness and canonical-bijection theorem for subset-valued basis families: it
  packages counting normalization and 3.4 into the claim that every minimal generating family picks
  one representative from each irreducible transparent-generation class. The Agda development does
  not separately formalize those subset-valued basis families; instead it takes the counted active
  interface as primitive.
• 2.22 is the paper's basis-cardinality reformulation of Metatheory/CanonicityDensity.agda via
  CanonicityDensityTheorem and global-admissibility-forces-maximal-interface-density,
  combined with the bridge-level normalization and canonical-presentation results of section 3.
                             COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                                          35




                     Table 3: Mechanization status of the main theorem stack.
   Paper result               Formal status                    Agda module(s)                     Bridge?

   section 3 normalization    paper-level only                 none                               n/a
   package
   3.5                        fully formalized on explicit     Metatheory/                        yes
                              canonical    trace   presenta-   ComputationalReplacement.agda
                              tions
   2.12                       fully formalized                 Metatheory/InterfaceCalculus.      no
                                                               agda
   2.17                       paper-level only                 none                               n/a
   2.22, 2.23, 3.7            formalized abstractly, read      Metatheory/CanonicityDensity.      yes
                              through bridge                   agda,                Metatheory/
                                                               TracePrinciple.agda, Metatheory/
                                                               InterfaceCalculus.agda
   4.5, 4.8                   fully formalized                 Metatheory/Obligations.agda,       no
                                                               Metatheory/Extensional.agda
   4.9, 4.13, 4.14, 4.16      fully formalized                 Metatheory/KanSubsumption.agda,    no
                                                               Metatheory/UpperBound.agda,
                                                               Metatheory/ChronologicalWindow.
                                                               agda
   3.9, 4.11, 4.15            formalized abstractly, with      Metatheory/KanSubsumption.agda,    yes
                              the replacement step itself      Metatheory/UpperBound.agda,
                              formalized                       Metatheory/ChronologicalWindow.
                                                               agda,                Metatheory/
                                                               ComputationalReplacement.agda
   5.6, 5.7                   formalized abstractly, read      Metatheory/KanSubsumption.agda,    yes
                              through bridge                   Metatheory/UpperBound.agda,
                                                               Metatheory/ChronologicalWindow.
                                                               agda,                Metatheory/
                                                               ComputationalReplacement.agda
   4.17, 4.19, 4.20           fully formalized                 Metatheory/AdjunctionBarrier.      no
                                                               agda,   Geometry/Clutching.agda,
                                                               Metatheory/ExactDepth.agda
   5.8, 5.9                   fully formalized                 Metatheory/TwoDFoundations.agda,   no
                                                               Metatheory/TwoLTTFoundations.
                                                               agda
   5.1, 5.2, 5.3              formalized abstractly, read      Metatheory/UniversalRecurrence.    yes
                              through bridge                   agda, Core/DepthOneAffine.agda,
                                                               Core/AffineRecurrence.agda
   5.5                        fully formalized                 Metatheory/Refactoring.agda        no



• 2.23 corresponds exactly to Metatheory/TracePrinciple.agda via IntegrationTracePrinciple,
  public-counting-normal-form, and integration-trace-principle, built on the explicit sealed-
  layer presentation ExplicitSealedLayer from Metatheory/InterfaceCalculus.agda.
• 3.7 is the paper's bridge corollary combining 2.22, 2.23, and the normalization/canonical-
  presentation results of section 3; the Agda development formalizes the abstract counting theorems,
  while the passage to the syntactic quantity µ is the paper's normalized-signature reading of those
  results.
• 4.5 corresponds exactly to Metatheory/Obligations.agda via historical-arity-forces-cell-dimension
  and irreducible-obligation-requires-cell.
• 4.8 corresponds exactly to Metatheory/Extensional.agda via UIP-forces-depth-1 and history-truncates-to-one
• 4.9 corresponds exactly to Metatheory/KanSubsumption.agda via HornExtensionFiber, structural-integration-h
  and remote-layer-obligation-derived.
• 3.5 is formalized in Metatheory/ComputationalReplacement.agda. That module makes the
  canonical trace-signature interface explicit via CanonicalTraceSignature and TracePresentation,
36                                      H. LANDE




  packages the presentation theorem itself as computational-replacement-preserves-canonical-presentation,
  and exposes the higher-arity elimination consequence via higher-arity-fields-disappear-from-minimal-signatur
  and higher-arity-computational-replacement. The remaining paper-level ingredient is only
  the passage from raw surface declarations to that canonical interface.
• 3.9 is the paper's bridge-level export theorem: TelescopicSubsumptionView in Metatheory/
  KanSubsumption.agda packages the recent boundary together with the iterated trace chain, while
  primitive-obligations-factor-through-last-two in Metatheory/ChronologicalWindow.agda
  records that primitive support factors through the last two layers. The paper theorem uses 2.23,
   3.2, and 3.4 to read that formal package as an explicit normalized exported trace basis.
• 4.11 is the paper's surface-syntactic corollary of Metatheory/KanSubsumption.agda, Metatheory/
  UpperBound.agda, Metatheory/TwoDFoundations.agda, and Metatheory/ComputationalReplacement.
  agda: the Agda development formalizes the horn-extension ber, its canonical inhabitant, stabiliza-
  tion at depth 2, the abstract primitive-elimination law, and the canonical-trace replacement inter-
  face via HornExtensionFiber, structural-integration-horn-reduction, remote-layer-obligation-derived,
  structural-obligation-set-equivalence, structural-stabilizes-at-two, structural-primitive-eliminates
  higher-arity-fields-disappear-from-minimal-signature, and higher-arity-computational-replacement;
  the remaining paper step is the initial bridge from a raw surface declaration to the canonical trace
  presentation on which those formal theorems are stated.
• 4.15 corresponds exactly to Metatheory/KanSubsumption.agda via TelescopicSubsumptionView,
  telescopic-subsumption, and telescopic-remote-comparison-derived; its reading as recent-
  history factorization through normalized public signatures is again the paper's bridge-level inter-
  pretation of that formal trace chain.
• 5.6 is the paper's stronger horn-computational wrapper. It combines the horn-reduction and
  contractible-factor package from Metatheory/KanSubsumption.agda and Metatheory/UpperBound.
  agda, the two-layer support factorization theorem primitive-obligations-factor-through-last-two
  from Metatheory/ChronologicalWindow.agda, and the canonical-trace replacement interface of
  Metatheory/ComputationalReplacement.agda via CanonicalTraceSignature, TracePresentation,
  higher-arity-fields-disappear-from-minimal-signature, and higher-arity-computational-replacement,
  read through the bridge-level normalization package of section 3. 5.7 is the paper's checked in-
  stantiation of that wrapper for the chosen cubical calculus.
• 4.13 corresponds exactly to Metatheory/UpperBound.agda via structural-obligation-set-equivalence
  and structural-stabilizes-at-two.
• 4.14 corresponds exactly to Metatheory/UpperBound.agda via ContractibleRemoteFactor,
  structural-obligation-contractible-factorization, and contractible-remote-factor-contractible;
  this is the formal trivialization of each higher exact obligation set into the depth-two boundary
  together with a canonically contractible remote horn chain.
• 4.16 corresponds exactly to Metatheory/ChronologicalWindow.agda via primitive-obligations-factor-through-
  two-layer-chronological-window, and chronological-markov-blanket.
• 4.17 corresponds exactly to Metatheory/AdjunctionBarrier.agda via explicit-binary-sealing-obstruction.
• 4.18 corresponds to the same module's categorical wrapper via triangle-identity-corollary
  and adjunction-barrier.
• 4.19 corresponds exactly to Geometry/Clutching.agda via clutching-family-theorem, hopf-binary-clutching-no
  and clutching-horn-extension-fiber-contractible.
• 4.20 corresponds exactly to Metatheory/ExactDepth.agda via structural-coherence-depth-exactly-two,
  structural-chronological-window-size-exactly-two, cubical-coherence-depth-exactly-two,
  and cubical-chronological-window-size-exactly-two.
• 5.8 corresponds exactly to Metatheory/TwoDFoundations.agda. The weaker primitive/window
  layer is packaged there by PrimitiveWindow2DFoundation, primitive-depth-two-law-for-2d-foundations,
  and chronological-window-size-two-for-2d-foundations; the separate exact-depth wrapper
  of the theorem is packaged by FullyCoupled2DFoundation, depth-two-law-for-2d-foundations,
  and constant-payload-depth-two-law. The cubical instance is exposed there by cubical-primitive-window-2d-fo
                         COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                                  37




  cubical-primitive-depth-two-law-for-2d-foundations, and cubical-depth-two-law-for-2d-foundations.
  The explicit strict/brant 2LTT-style instantiation of 5.9 is packaged in Metatheory/TwoLTTFoundations.
  agda via two-level-language, two-level-primitive-window-2d-foundation, two-level-primitive-depth-two-
  two-level-2d-foundation, two-level-depth-two-law-for-2d-foundations, and two-level-window-size-two-f
• 5.1 corresponds exactly to Metatheory/UniversalRecurrence.agda via WindowedRecurrenceContext,
  ChronologicalRecurrenceContext, UniversalAffineRecurrence, universal-affine-recurrence,
  and universal-affine-recurrence-from-coherence, read through 3.7 so that the paper's
  surface-syntactic recurrence is stated over µ.
• 5.2 corresponds exactly to Core/DepthOneAffine.agda via depth1-affine-growth, Delta-depth1-closed,
  and tau-depth1-closed; in the paper these arithmetic laws are read through 3.7 as statements
  about minimal opaque cost.
• 5.3 corresponds exactly to Core/AffineRecurrence.agda via Delta-bootstrap, U-bootstrap-closed,
  and tau-bootstrap-closed; again the code's Delta-named arithmetic sequence is the paper's
  µ-sequence after the bridge identication of 3.7.
• 5.5 corresponds exactly to Metatheory/Refactoring.agda via historical-support-correspondence
  and refactoring-invariance.
    No module cited in the theorem map above uses postulate. Postulates do occur in
auxiliary modules elsewhere in the code base, but not in the modules invoked here.
       The trusted base is Agda with Cubical support together with the Cubical library de-
clared in pen.agda-lib. The arithmetic layer uses Core/Nat.agda; the clutching formaliza-
tion additionally uses the Cubical library's standard higher-inductive circle and suspension
modules Cubical.HITs.S1.Base and Cubical.HITs.Susp.Base, together with the standard
equivalence, isomorphism, and univalence infrastructure.
       The formalization includes both direct cubical metatheory and a distilled extension
calculus. The UIP collapse, horn-extension computation, the canonical-trace replacement
interface, recent-history factorization chain, lower-bound obstruction, exact depth-two corol-
lary, and clutching-family witness are mechanized against cubical or UIP primitives them-
selves. The remaining surface-syntactic theorems about normalized signatures and minimal
opaque cost are then obtained in the paper by combining those formal metatheorems with
the bridge normalization results of section 3. The canonicity, trace, refactoring, recurrence,
and abstract 2D-foundations layers package those results as the sealed-interface and count-
ing calculus studied in the paper. The formalized core is therefore explicit, but the passage
from raw declarations to the paper's µ-based syntax still uses the bridge.


6.2.   Barrier discipline and ane recurrence. Its organizing invariant is that resolved
layers are exported through opaque interfaces.      At the level of proof architecture, this is
the exact content of     2.23, realized in Agda by integration-trace-principle: once an
obligation has been discharged, later constructions depend only on the exported schema and
not on the hidden derivation tree that discharged it. In the barrier modules, this is checked
locally for the transitions around steps 8 and 9 by showing that inherited obligations are
discharged from the owning layer's opaque record interface alone, without reopening deeper
internal derivations.
       This realizes the abstraction barrier promised by   2.8. In the formalization,   2.12 is ex-
actly the package transparent-growth-keeps-library-state, transparent-definitions-preserve-active
transparent-definitions-have-zero-integration-latency, and transparent-user-level-code-lies-ou
It is the reason historical depth is measured in terms of sealed layers rather than in terms
of raw derivation ancestry.
38                                        H. LANDE




     On the counting side, the Agda development makes the modeling discipline explicit.
The active primitive interface is represented as the disjoint union of the two most recent
schema sets, and the saturation step is stated separately rather than hidden in the syntax
of imports. In the basis-family presentation used here, recurrence counts the well-dened
common cardinality of any minimal generating family for that interface and then reads
that abstract count as minimal opaque cost via       3.7.   The concrete decompositions in
Saturation/Decomposition.agda then record, step by step, how the next obligation set
splits into contributions from the two most recent sealed layers.
    Metatheory/UniversalRecurrence.agda proves universal-affine-recurrence, while
Core/DepthOneAffine.agda and Core/AffineRecurrence.agda package the exact arith-
metic specializations depth1-affine-growth, Delta-depth1-closed, tau-depth1-closed,
Delta-bootstrap, U-bootstrap-closed, and tau-bootstrap-closed. In particular, Core/
AffineRecurrence.agda extends the payload-free counting law to the payload-aware recur-
rence
                                µn+1 = µn + µn−1 + 2c,
denes the shifted sequence Un = µn + 2c, and proves that U satises the homogeneous
Fibonacci recurrence. In the code base those arithmetic lemmas still carry Delta-names,
because they are formalized on the abstract counting sequence before the bridge identi-
cation with µ.  The zero-payload specialization is linked back to Core/Nat.agda, while
ObligationGraph/Recurrence.agda records the payload-free corollary and Test/Fibonacci.
agda checks the concrete Fibonacci identities.
                                                                                 abstraction-
     The mechanization separates four claims that are easy to conate in prose. The
barrier claim says that historical memory is mediated only by opaque exports. The metathe-
oretic depth claim says that higher exact obligation types are present but contractible at
arity 3 and above, while binary obligations remain genuinely independent in general. The
syntactic minimality claim says that, after passage through the bridge normalization the-
orems and the computational-replacement interface, those present-but-contractible higher
obligations are read as transparently derived elds and hence eliminated from µ-minimal
public signatures, while the surviving binary ones satisfy recent-history factorization. The
recurrence claim says that, once the depth-two window and explicit payload accounting are
in place, the cardinality of the next primitive basis interface is governed by the ane depth-
two law above. The formalization establishes the metatheoretic ingredients and the abstract
counting law, and the paper records the bridge reading that turns them into the µ-based
theorem stack.

Remark 6.1 (Scope of the mechanization). The formalization establishes the cubical ex-
act upper- and lower-bound metatheory, the abstract candidate-and-obligation calculus, the
canonical-trace replacement interface, and the recurrence package built on them. The ex-
act paper-to-Agda correspondences are listed above; the cited modules use no postulate;
and the clutching module is checked separately only because its HIT imports live on the
Cubical library's standard natural-number interface rather than on Core/Nat.agda.        The
mathematical arguments of section 4 remain important as explanation and as links to the
categorical and topological examples. What remains at the paper level is the initial bridge
from raw surface declarations to the canonical normalized-signature interface, including the
surface-syntactic readings of 3.9, 4.11, 4.15, and the µ-based recurrence.
                       COHERENCE DEPTH AND AFFINE RECURRENCE                                39




                                      7. Conclusion

The paper isolates   obligation depth dobl as the exact metatheoretic invariant of a xed
cubical extension calculus and distinguishes it from the separate minimal-signature depth dµ
governing what survives in   µ-minimal normalized public form.       The associated payload
counts, abstract latency counts, and normalized-signature quantity µ are taken on counting
normal forms of sealed interfaces, so they are stable under admissible record rebundling,
interface slicing, and other canonical telescope refactorings.   In extensional settings with
UIP, higher coherences collapse and the obligation depth is 1.     In the xed fully coupled
cubical extension calculus studied here, the obligation depth is 2, while   4.11 gives dµ ≤ 2.
Exact stabilization, elimination from minimal syntax, and chronological factorization are
therefore three separate layers of the theorem architecture, not three phrasings of one fact.
The main metatheorem is a depth-two ane recurrence for minimal opaque cost; under
uniform payload size, the shifted sequence is Fibonacci.
    The mechanism behind the recurrence is structural. In the formalization,      2.22 is read
through global-admissibility-forces-maximal-interface-density together with the
bridge-level normalization theorems, 2.23 by integration-trace-principle, and 4.16 by
two-layer-chronological-window. Sealing cost is therefore identied with the size of the
active basis interface, while resolved coherence data disappear as derivations but remain
present in the public signature as trace elds. In the cubical case, the marginal higher-arity
data are horn extensions rather than closed-sphere llers; structural-stabilizes-at-two
and cubical-coherence-depth-exactly-two make the exact stabilization statement pre-
cise, the replacement interface of Metatheory/ComputationalReplacement.agda turns cu-
bically synthesized higher witnesses into elimination from the µ-minimal part of a canoni-
cal trace presentation, and primitive-obligations-factor-through-last-two gives the
recent-history factorization underlying the two-layer window. The explicit swap obstruction
and the clutching family supply exact lower-bound witnesses. Under constant payload size
universal-affine-recurrence, read through 3.7, specializes to the ane depth-two law
and Delta-bootstrap gives the shifted Fibonacci corollary.
    From this viewpoint the appearance of the Golden Ratio is not an empirical regularity
of one implementation and not a matter of aesthetic numerology. It is the characteristic root
of the homogeneous recurrence recovered after separating the constant payload contribution
from the depth-two coherence memory.
    The Cubical Agda formalization therefore certies the cubical metatheory and abstract
recurrence package on which the paper's extension-calculus theorem stack rests, rather than
merely illustrating isolated ingredients.   section 6 records the exact paper-to-Agda map;
representative formal counterparts are history-truncates-to-one for the UIP collapse,
structural-stabilizes-at-two and cubical-coherence-depth-exactly-two for the ex-
act depth package, higher-arity-computational-replacement for the canonical-trace re-
placement step, primitive-obligations-factor-through-last-two for the recent-history
factorization core, cubical-depth-two-law-for-2d-foundations for the abstract 2D-foundations
wrapper, and Delta-bootstrap, read through 3.7, for the shifted Fibonacci corollary. The
trust assumptions are exactly the Agda/Cubical kernel, the declared Cubical library, and
the arithmetic layer used by the development, with no postulates in the cited proof modules;
what remains outside the formal core is the initial bridge from raw surface declarations to
the canonical normalized-signature interface on which µ is read. A natural next step is to
40                                             H. LANDE




connect this metatheory more tightly to concrete systems for generating and integrating
candidate extensions.



                                             References

[ACK16]    Thorsten Altenkirch, Paolo Capriotti, and Nicolai Kraus. Extending homotopy type theory
           with strict equality. In 25th EACSL Annual Conference on Computer Science Logic (CSL
           2016), volume 62 of Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics (LIPIcs), pages 21:121:17.
           Schloss Dagstuhl  Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2016. URL: https://drops.dagstuhl.de/
           entities/document/10.4230/LIPIcs.CSL.2016.21, doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.CSL.2016.21.
[ACKS23]   Danil Annenkov, Paolo Capriotti, Nicolai Kraus, and Christian Sattler. Two-level type theory
           and applications. Mathematical Structures in Computer Science, 33(7):688743, 2023. doi:10.
           1017/S0960129523000130.
[AKGB24] Frederik Lerbjerg Aagaard, Magnus Baunsgaard Kristensen, Daniel Gratzer, and Lars Birkedal.
           Unifying cubical and multimodal type theory. Logical Methods in Computer Science, 20(4), 2024.
         URL: https://lmcs.episciences.org/14929, doi:10.46298/lmcs-20(4:25)2024.
    +
[BCM 20] Lars Birkedal, Ranald Clouston, Bassel Mannaa, Rasmus Ejlers Møgelberg, Andrew M. Pitts,
           and Bas Spitters. Modal dependent type theory and dependent right adjoints. Mathematical
           Structures in Computer Science, 30(2):118138, 2020. doi:10.1017/S0960129519000197.
[CCHM18] Cyril Cohen, Thierry Coquand, Simon Huber, and Anders Mörtberg. Cubical type theory: a
           constructive interpretation of the univalence axiom. In 21st International Conference on Types
           for Proofs and Programs (TYPES 2015), 2018.
[CHM18]    Thierry Coquand, Simon Huber, and Anders Mörtberg. On higher inductive types in cubical
           type theory. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer
           Science, 2018.
[Hus94]    Dale Husemoller. Fiber Bundles, volume 20 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Springer, 3 edition,
           1994.
[KvR19]    Nicolai Kraus and Jakob von Raumer. Coherence via well-foundedness. In Proceedings of the
           34th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, 2019.
[Lan63]    Saunders Mac Lane. Natural associativity and commutativity. Rice University Studies, 49(4):28
           46, 1963.
[Lum10]    Peter LeFanu Lumsdaine. Weak ω -categories from intensional type theory. In Typed Lambda
           Calculi and Applications, volume 6690 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 172187,
           2010.
[Sta63]    James D. Stashe. Homotopy associativity of H-spaces I, II. Transactions of the American Math-
           ematical Society, 108(2):275312, 1963.
[Uni13]    Univalent Foundations Program. Homotopy Type Theory: Univalent Foundations of Mathematics.
           Institute for Advanced Study, 2013. URL: https://homotopytypetheory.org/book.
[vdBG11]   Benno van den Berg and Richard Garner. Types are weak ω -groupoids. Proceedings of the London
           Mathematical Society, 102(2):370394, 2011.
[VMA19]    Andrea Vezzosi, Anders Mörtberg, and Andreas Abel. Cubical agda: a dependently typed pro-
           gramming language with univalence and higher inductive types. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM
           SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional Programming, 2019.
